2025-2026 
Undergraduate Catalog 

Point Park 
University 

Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The University Seal 

Point Park University’s seal retains several elements from the seal of Point Park College. These include the escutcheon 
with the inverted furca (fork) as its ensign. The inverted furca represents salvation flowing from above and embracing the 
world below. This furca also draws obvious attention to the Monongahela, Allegheny and Ohio Rivers and their confluence 
at Point Park, the triangular spot of land in downtown Pittsburgh that gave the University its name. 

The three scrolls contained within the escutcheon articulate the goals of a Point Park University education and express that 
a Point Park education stands for the benefit of knowledge, the community and careers. 

This catalog is the official announcement of Point Park University (a tax-exempt, not-for-profit, educational institution) 
for the academic year 2025-2026. The University reserves the right to repeal, change, or amend the rules, regulations, and 
provisions contained in this catalog, and may withdraw or modify the programs and courses listed herein. Updates to the 
catalog will be posted on the University website. It is published by the Office of the University Registrar. 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 

ACADEMIC CALENDAR 2025-2026 ........................................................................ 4 

THE UNIVERSITY MISSION STATEMENT .......................................................... 5 

GENERAL INFORMATION ................................................................................... 9 

ADMISSIONS ........................................................................................................ 15 

STUDENT ACCOUNTS........................................................................................ 20 

FINANCIAL AID ................................................................................................... 23 

STUDENT AFFAIRS ............................................................................................. 31 

STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES ........................................................................ 35 

ACADEMIC POLICIES ......................................................................................... 42 

ACADEMIC PROGRAMS ..................................................................................... 62 

CONSERVATORY OF PERFORMING ARTS ...................................................... 72 

SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SCIENCES ................................................................. 107 

ROWLAND SCHOOL OF BUSINESS ................................................................ 158 

SCHOOL OF COMMUNICATION .................................................................... 192 

SCHOOL OF CONTINUING AND PROFESSIONAL STUDIES ....................... 213 

SCHOOL OF EDUCATION ................................................................................ 218 

COURSE DESCRIPTIONS .................................................................................. 252 

HONORARY DEGREE RECIPIENTS ................................................................ 390 

BOARD OF TRUSTEES ...................................................................................... 391 

CABINET ............................................................................................................. 392 

FULL-TIME FACULTY ........................................................................................ 392 

3 

 
 
 
 
Calendar 2025-2026 

Fall Semester 2025 

Fall Term Begins 
Labor Day, University Closed 
Pioneer Pause 
Thanksgiving Break 
Last Regular Class Session 
Final Examination Week 

 August 25 
  September 1 
October 28 
November 24 - 30 

  December 8 

December 9 - 12 

Spring Semester 2026 

Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Day, University Closed 
Spring Term Begins 
Spring Break 
Last Regular Class Session                                                                               May 4 
Final Examination Week 
Commencement                                                                                              May 8 

 January 19 
January 20 

                   March 9 - 15 

May 5 - 8 

Summer Semester 2026 

Summer Term Begins                                                                                 May 11 
Memorial Day, University Closed                                                                 May 25 
Juneteenth, University Closed                                                                          
June 19 
Independence Day Observation, University Closed                                        July 3 
July 31 
Summer II & Summer 12 Classes End                                                         

For the full academic calendar, including add/drop dates, and online terms, please visit our webpage. 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Point Park University 

Mission Statement 

We inspire imagination and creativity through experiential learning to advance society. 

Vision Statement 

To be one of the most dynamic, urban universities in America. 

Values 

Inclusiveness 

Integrity 

Innovation 

Excellence 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
About the University 

Founded in 1933, Point Park is a dynamic, urban university with a strong liberal arts tradition. Located in 
Downtown  Pittsburgh,  Point  Park  enrolls  approximately  3,000  full-  and  part-time  students.  There  are  87 
bachelor’s  programs, 21 master’s programs,  several  graduate  and  undergraduate  certification  programs, and 
four doctoral programs offered through the School of Arts and Sciences, Rowland School of Business, School of 
Communication, School of Education, School of Continuing and Professional Studies, and Conservatory of 
Performing Arts. 

Since  its  founding,  Point  Park  has  been  known  for  providing  students  with  an  innovative,  disciplined 
education that brings real-world experience into the classroom. Many of the faculty members are professional 
practitioners.  Classes  are  small  by  design,  giving  students  more  one-on-one  time  with  professors.  The 
University’s  unique  urban  location  puts  students  in  close  proximity  to  internships,  cooperative  education 
opportunities, culture, entertainment, and employment opportunities. 

Embedded in Downtown, Point Park is committed to being an integral part of the success of the city and 
region.  Its  growth  and  development  over  the  years  reflects  that:  Established  in  1933  as  a  business  training 
college, Point Park became a junior college in 1960 and then a four-year undergraduate institution in 1966. It 
offered its first graduate degree in 1981 and achieved university status in 2003. In 2008, Point Park announced 
the Academic Village Initiative, a multi-block, living and learning hub that is redefining the student experience, 
campus  life  and  the  University’s  connection  to  Downtown Pittsburgh.  The  Academic  Village  Initiative  has 
resulted in new residence halls, a student center, the Village Park and streetscape enhancements.  Since then, 
Point Park has been on the forefront of downtown’s transformation with such innovative networking places as 
The Center for  Media Innovation, opened in 2016,  and the  Downtown  Pittsburgh Media Hub, opened in 
2022. In the fall of 2018, the new Pittsburgh Playhouse opened downtown, having relocated from Oakland. 

The Campus 

Point Park University is located in one of America’s most dynamic cities - Downtown Pittsburgh. The city 
consistently ranks among the top places to live, work, and visit, and the Pittsburgh region boasts dozens of 
billion-dollar global companies. 

Point Park has actively participated in the city’s rejuvenation. The campus, which includes the new Point 
Park University’s Pittsburgh Playhouse built in 2018, has expanded from five buildings to one of Downtown’s 
largest footprints. The Academic Village Initiative has included such recent campus additions as the George 
Rowland  White  Performance  Center,  a  Leadership  in  Energy  and  Environmental  Design  (LEED)  Gold-
certified building, loft-style residence halls, the Village Park, streetscape enhancements, a student center, and 
Lawrence Hall lobby renovations that include an art gallery. 

The School of Communication also boasts the Center for Media Innovation, which includes broadcast 
and  photo  studios,  a  multimedia  newsroom,  podcasting  center,  and  presentation  and  gallery  space.    The 
Pittsburgh Downtown Media Hub (PDMH) brings together professional journalists and Point Park University 
communication students to advance local storytelling through collaboration and shared resources. The Hub 
currently  houses  six  news  outlets  --  City  Cast  Pittsburgh,  The  Incline,  NEXT  Pittsburgh,  The  Pittsburgh 
Independent, Qburgh and Storyburgh – as well as the Pittsburgh Women’s Press Club. The shared workspace 
includes a podcast studio, conference room, work lounge and kitchen. The Benter Foundation made the space 
available to Point Park’s Center for Media Innovation. 

At Point Park, the city is truly our campus. Students can walk to cultural attractions such as the Pittsburgh 
Symphony Orchestra, the Pittsburgh Ballet Theatre, and the Pittsburgh Opera, as well as the latest concerts at 
Stage AE on the North Shore. Major sporting events held at PNC Park, Acrisure Stadium, and the PPG Paints 

6 

 
 
 
Arena are also close to campus. Just across the Monongahela River from the University is Station Square, a 
unique entertainment destination on the river. Other local attractions include the Pittsburgh Zoo & Aquarium, 
the Duquesne and Monongahela inclines, the National Aviary, and the Phipps Conservatory and Botanical 
Gardens. Notable museums in the area include the Carnegie museums of Art and Natural History, the Carnegie 

Science Center, and the Andy Warhol Museum, all of which offer generous discounts to our students.  

Pittsburgh Playhouse 

Point Park University's Pittsburgh Playhouse is the performing arts center of Point Park University and 
the Conservatory of Performing Arts. The three-theater performing arts center in downtown Pittsburgh is home 
to Conservatory Theatre Company and Conservatory Dance Company. The Pittsburgh Playhouse maintains a 
rigorous performance calendar with eighteen major productions and 235 performances entertaining more than 
30,000 patrons annually. 

A 90,411-square-foot theater complex, the Pittsburgh Playhouse features a total of 91 rooms including a 
magnificent  lobby  space  that  boasts  a  three  story  wide-open  space  with  natural  light,  a  grand  staircase  and 
tucked-in  spaces  for  students  to  lounge  and  gather;  the  550-seat  PNC  Theatre  whose  backstage  and  inner 
workings are visible from the street, resulting in an intentional glimpse into performing arts classes; the main 
floor which includes an enormous paint shop, a 2,738-square-foot soundstage three stories high, a 15-foot- high 
catwalk and 24-foot-high ceilings to provide professional-level learning opportunities to students in multiple 
disciplines, including cinematography, audio work, lighting work and aesthetics. 

The Library  

The Point Park University Library is located on the first floor and the lower level of the University Center, 
a turn of the twentieth century former bank building which also houses classrooms, a 200-seat auditorium, and 
production facilities for the Department of Film and Animation, as well as the TV broadcasting program for 
the School of Communication. 

The Library has quiet study space, an instruction/computer lab, fourteen group study rooms, a presentation 
practice & recording room and a small relaxation room on the lower level. There is a larger relaxation room in 
the  old  bank  vault  on  the  first  floor.    Computers,  scanners,  and  printers  are  available  on  both  levels. 
Headphones, calculators, and HDMI cables can be checked out at the Reference Desk. The Library supports a 
wireless  environment  and  students  can  print  from  their  own  devices.  The  Library  houses  books,  DVDs, 
microfilm, newspapers, print journals, and magazines to support Point Park University’s programs. The Library 
provides  access  to  thousands  of  full  text  articles  and  e-books  through  database  subscriptions.  Many  of  the 
databases are subject specific, providing scholarly resources in the fields of education, business, performing arts, 
journalism, psychology, and criminal justice, as well as other Point Park University academic programs. Special 
holdings within the Library include plays, musical scores, librettos, anthologies, and monologues; a popular 
reading collection with new fiction and non-fiction titles; a Digital Arts reserve film collection; and a children’s 
literature  collection.  A  current  Point  Park  University  ID  is  required  to  borrow  material  from  the  Library. 
Students can access the Library’s online databases off-campus by using their Point Park University e-mail log-
in. E-Z Borrow is an online service that permits Point Park University students, staff and faculty to search for 
and borrow books from over 50 participating academic libraries. Library staff provides research support through 
e-mail,  phone,  instant  messenger,  walk  in,  and  by  appointment.  Additional  information  about  Point  Park 
University  Library  and  its  resources  can  be  found  at  www.pointpark.edu  by  clicking  on  the  Library  link. 
https://www.pointpark.edu/academics/academicresources/ library/index. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Student Center 

The  Student  Center  is  open  year-round,  offering  opportunities  for  fitness  training,  recreation,  and 
individual and group programming. Free weights and Nautilus equipment are available. Billiards, electronic 
darts, and table  tennis are offered as leisure activities, in addition to a full-court gymnasium, and  free  bike 
rental. Students are encouraged to take advantage of the fitness opportunities provided by the Student Center, 
which is open to all currently registered students free of charge. The Student Center is also home to the new 
state-of-the- art Esports arena. A valid Pioneer Card is required for entry to the facility. For more information, 
visit the website. 

8 

 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
Annual Notification of Rights under FERPA 
(Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act) 

The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) affords students certain rights with respect to their education 

records. They are: 

(1) The right to inspect and review the student’s education records. 

A student should submit to the Registrar, Financial Aid Director or other appropriate University official written requests 
that identify the record(s) the student wishes to inspect. The University official will make arrangements for access within 
45 days of the University’s receipt of the initial request and notify the student of the time and place where the records 
may be inspected. If the records are not maintained by the University official to whom the request was submitted, that 
official shall advise the student of the correct official to whom the request should be addressed. 

(2) The right to request an amendment of the student’s education records that he/she believes are inaccurate or misleading. 
The student shall write the University official responsible for the record, clearly identify the part of the record the student 
wants to have changed and specify why it is inaccurate or misleading. 
If the University decides not to amend the record as requested by the student, the University will notify the student of 
the decision and advise the student of his or her right to a hearing regarding the request for amendment. Additional 
information regarding the hearing procedures will be provided to the student when notified of the right to a hearing. 

(3) The right to consent to disclosures of personally identifiable information contained in the student’s education records, 

except to the extent that FERPA authorizes disclosure without consent. 
One  exception  that  permits  disclosure  without  consent  is  disclosure  to  school  officials  with  legitimate  educational 
interests. A school official is a person employed by the University or acting in an administrative, supervisory, academic, 
research, or support staff position (including law enforcement unit personnel and health staff); a person or company 
with whom the University has contracted (such as an attorney, auditor, or collection agent); an administrator or faculty 
member from an institution with which Point Park University has an academic or clinical affiliation who has legitimate 
educational interest; a person serving on the Board of Trustees; or a student serving on an official committee, such as a 
disciplinary or grievance committee, or assisting another school official in performing his or her tasks. 

A school official has a legitimate educational interest if the official needs to review an education record in order to fulfill 
his or her professional responsibility for the University. 

Upon  request,  the  University  discloses  education  records  without  consent  to  officials  of  another  school  in  which  a 
student is, seeks, or intends to enroll. 

Point Park University reserves the right to release directory information without prior written consent of a student unless 
notified in writing to the contrary. The following items are considered by Point Park University as Directory Information: 
student  name,  addresses  (including  electronic),  telephone  number(s),  date  and  place  of  birth,  field(s)  or  program(s), 
participation  in  officially  recognized  activities,  photographs,  enrollment  status,  dates  of  attendance,  height,  weight, 
degrees, awards and honors received, previous schools attended, and post completion placements, including employment 
and graduate school attendance. 

(4) The right to file a complaint with the U.S. Department of Education concerning alleged failures by the University to 

comply with the requirements of FERPA. The name and address of the Office that administers FERPA is: 
Family Policy Compliance Office 
U.S. Department of Education 400 Maryland Avenue, SW Washington, DC 20202-4605 

9 

 
Credit Hour Policy 

Point  Park  University  complies  with  Federal  (US  DOE)  and  Middle  States  Commission  of  Higher 
Education  (MSCHE)  regulations  regarding  degree  and  credit  hours.  Point  Park  University  undergraduate 
degrees require the satisfactory completion of a minimum of 120 semester credit hours, and at least 40 semester 
credit hours are in general education.  All graduate degrees require at least 30 semester credit hours. Associate 
degrees require at least 60 semester credit hours. 

Point Park operates on an academic year divided into two semesters (fall and spring) of approximately 15 
weeks in length. Summer sessions, as well as some eight-week sessions offered throughout the year, comply with 
the established University credit policy. 

One semester credit is equivalent to one hour of faculty face-to-face instruction time per week for 15 weeks 
and a minimum of two hours of student preparation time outside of the classroom each week per credit hour. 
Different  modes  of  instruction  will  meet  instructional  hour  requirements  by  following  the  Equivalent 
Instructional Activity policy in this document. 

The University also follows the U.S. Department of Education definition of credit hour “an amount of 
work  represented  in  intended  learning  outcomes  and  verified  by  evidenced  of  student  achievement.”  The 
University established the following guidelines that are in concert with the U.S. DOE as well as MSCHE: one 
hour  of classroom or direct faculty instruction and a minimum of two  hours out of class  student work for 
approximately 15 weeks (or equivalency over different time periods). 

Specifically,  the  University  follows  the  established  curricular  credit  regulations  of  the  Pennsylvania 
Department of Education (PDE): 22 Pa. Code Chapter 31, 31.21-31.22. One semester credit is defined as 14 
hours  of  classroom  instruction.  A  three-credit  semester-based  course  would  need  to  meet  for  42  hours  of 
classroom instruction throughout the semester. In addition, PDE requires that hours of classroom instruction 
cannot be calculated to include exams. Therefore, a typical semester course meets for 14 weeks (3 credits equals 
42 hours of instruction) with a final exam in week 15 (2 hours). 

PDE’s  curricular  credit  policy  allows  for  determining  activities  that  are  the  equivalent  of  classroom 

instruction.  Definitions of Point Park University’s formats and modalities of instruction appear below: 

Lecture: One lecture, seminar, or discussion credit hour represents 1 hour per week of scheduled class/seminar 
time and 2 hours of student preparation time. Most lecture and seminar courses are awarded 3 credit hours. 

Laboratory: One laboratory credit hour represents 1-2 hours per week of scheduled supervised laboratory  work 
and 2 hours of student preparation time. 

Practicum: A practicum provides students with the opportunity to practice and enhance skills that they have 
acquired  in  previous  courses.  One  practicum  hour  is  equivalent  to  approximately  3-4  hours  of  internally-
supervised and unsupervised work per week for 15 weeks. A 3-credit practicum is at minimum 150 hours of 
internally supervised and unsupervised work in 15 weeks. 

Education Practica: (follows PDE guidelines) 
• 

Student Teaching Practicum: Twelve credit hours of supervised student teaching, representing 3 lecture 
hours and 30 classroom hours each week for 15 weeks. 
Instructional Studies Practicum: Six credit hours of supervised instruction, representing 3 lecture hours and 
18 classroom hours each week for 15 weeks. 

• 

Studio: One practice credit hour represents 3 hours per week of supervised and independent practice. (Dance 
students  experience  a  minimum  of  one  daily  technique  class  of  90  minutes  in  length,  as  required  by  the 
National Association of Schools of Dance.) 

Internship: Internships are determined by negotiation between the supervising faculty and the work supervisor 

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
at the cooperating site, both of whom must judge and certify various aspects of student’s work and completion of 
agreed upon outcomes and assessment of those outcomes. Three credits is equivalent to a minimum 150- 200 
hours of work. Students should verify their department’s required hours of work with their faculty supervisor. 
In  order  to  receive  credit,  students  must  register  for  an  Internship  course  prior  to  the  start  date  of  their 
internship.  Credit for an internship will not be granted after the completion of work and cannot be applied 
to applied knowledge learning. 

Applied Knowledge Learning: Credit for applied knowledge learning may be granted to individuals who submit 
evidence of learning equivalent to University level course objectives/learning outcomes.  Considered evidence 
may include portfolios, summaries of learning experiences, letters from supervisors and/or other materials that 
clearly illustrate achievement of each course learning outcome. A student must have completed a minimum of 
six credits at Point Park before a faculty evaluation for applied knowledge learning can be processed. Students 
may  earn  up  to  18  undergraduate  credits  in  applied  knowledge  learning.  These  credits  do  NOT  fulfill  the 
University residency requirement. 

Independent Study: Independent studies from 1-4 credits are offered if a comparable course is not available on 
campus  or  at  another  institution.  Students  must  secure  a  faculty  supervisor  and  obtain  permission  from  a 
department  chair  before  registering  for  an  independent  study.  Students  must  illustrate  achievement  of  the 
independent study course objectives/learning outcomes to receive credit. The student must interact with the 
faculty member on a regular and substantive basis to assure progress within the course. 

Online: The University follows the definition of Distance Education/Distance Learning consistent with HEOA, PDE 
and Middle States standards and guidelines for all distance learning degree or certificate programs: online courses at 
Point Park will be delivered 100% online.  Online courses satisfy the PDE guidelines for “equivalent instruction” 
outlined in PA Code 31.21: see Equivalent Instructional Activity (EIA) below. 

Hybrid:  Hybrid  courses  are  a  combination  of  face-to-face  and  distance  learning  methods.  The  University 
guidelines recommend that at least 40% and no more than  70% of instructional hours be  delivered online. 
Hybrid courses must utilize the University’s EIA policy (see below). 

Equivalent  Instructional  Activity  (EIA):  EIAs  must  be  part  of  the  course  design  when  the  format  for 
instructional meeting hours are less than the Pennsylvania Department of Education requirement of 42 hours 
plus 2 hours of final examination time. 

All Equivalent Instructional Activities must be included on the syllabus and should indicate the expected 
number  of  hours  of  class  meeting  time  provided  through  this  alternative  instructional  methodology.  The 
syllabus should also include a specific description of each EIA. 

The  Center  for  Inclusive  Excellence  provides  guidelines  to  faculty  for  the  use  in  designing  Equivalent 
Instructional Activities that meet the requirements of providing interaction with the student and the sharing 
of that interaction to the benefit of the entire class. 

Guidance for Developing Equivalent Instructional Activities (established 2007, revised 2012) 

With the advent of distance learning, the Pennsylvania Department of Education (PDE) recognizes that 
alternative  formats  for  instruction  are  possible  and  likely,  and  as  such,  has  determined  that  “equivalent” 
instructional modes may substitute for what was traditionally face-to-face instruction. 

Credit hour equivalencies must be stated for the amount of time that classes do not meet over the course 
of the term. Syllabi must include instruction mode equivalencies that are mapped to instructional objectives 
and learning outcomes. Homework is not equivalent to instructional time. 

Field work 

Instructional mode equivalencies include but are not limited to the following activities: 
• 
•  Telecommunication instruction (including the use or reliance upon Canvas software): lectures, web-links, 
discussion  boards,  chat  room,  blogs,  on-line  quizzes/exams,  video  conference,  email  correspondence, 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conference calls, etc. 

•  Collaborative group assignments – synchronous and asynchronous 
•  Demonstrations/Observations – virtual or otherwise 

Credit  Hour  Review:  The  Office  of  the  University  Registrar  regularly  audits  scheduled  course  offerings  to 
ensure compliance with credit hour requirements through its process for scheduling each semester. Faculty on 
the Curriculum Committee and Faculty Assembly review each new course and ensure that credit hours  are 
complying before voting for approval of these new courses. The Office of Academic and Student Affairs reviews 
all new courses to ensure compliance with credit hours and course learning outcomes before awarding final 
approval of courses. Changes in curriculum are noted in the University Catalog (updated each July/August), 
website, and PointWeb (Student Registration Portal). 

During the COVID-19 pandemic, students were given the option of replacing earned letter grades with a 
P (earned grades A through D) or an N (Earned grade of an F). This option was in place for Spring 2020, Fall 
2020, and Spring 2021.  

Also, during the pandemic, to better allow social distancing, classes were given a 50-minute credit hour.  

Diversity Statement 

As  an  institution  of  higher  education,  Point  Park  University  recognizes  its  responsibility  to  create  and 
maintain an environment that affirms the diversity of people and ideas. Point Park University embraces, sup- 
ports and actively pursues a policy of inclusiveness that recognizes, values, and reflects the diversity of the com- 
munity we serve and the world in which we live. 

To thrive as an academic institution, we believe we must foster a learning and working environment that 
encourages multiple perspectives and the open exchange of ideas in an unbiased and non-prejudicial way. Our 
commitment to diversity will make Point Park a welcoming place providing students, faculty, and staff with 
many opportunities to learn from each other. 

To  this  end  we  strive  to  attract  students,  develop  curriculum,  diversify  our  faculty  and  staff,  and  offer 
support  services.  We  are  consciously  guided  by  our  quest  to  achieve  broad  inclusiveness  and  afford  equal 
opportunity to all without regard to gender, race, ethnicity, national origin, religion, age, socioeconomic back- 
ground, sexual orientation or physical ability. 

Academic Absences Due to Religious Obligations 

As  a  nonsectarian  institution,  Point  Park  University  recognizes  the  diverse  faith  traditions  represented 
among the campus community and supports the rights of students, staff, and faculty to observe according to 
these traditions. In general, Point Park University adheres to the policy of including in the official calendar of 
the  University  only  certain  legal  holidays.  However,  members  of  any  religious  group  may,  without  penalty, 
absent themselves  from classes or events for religious observance, provided the student has given advanced 
notice. 

Students  who  notify  faculty  about  upcoming  absences  will  not  be  penalized  for  classes,  examinations, 
assignments, or events missed on these days. Faculty syllabi should also give dates of major assignments and 
exams, allowing students to inform faculty of likely conflicts. Students should consider that certain courses—
labs, applied knowledge learning, co-ops, rehearsals, productions, and performances, to name a few—are more 
difficult to accommodate than others. This complication does not mean students should avoid these types of 
courses, but it will place an emphasis on planning and communication with faculty. If faculty and student are 
unable to find an acceptable solution to missed assignments or exams, the matter should be referred to the 
appropriate academic dean for adjudication. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-Discrimination, Equal Opportunity and      Diversity Initiatives 
This policy affirms Point Park University's commitment to nondiscrimination, equal opportunity, and the 
pursuit of diversity. Point Park University does not discriminate on the basis of: sex, race, ethnicity, religion, 
color,  national  origin,  age  (40  years  and  over),  ancestry,  individuals  with  disabilities,  veteran  status,  sexual 
orientation,  gender,  gender  identity,  height,  weight,  genetic  information,  marital  status,  caregiver  status,  or 
familial status and such discrimination is prohibited in the administration of any of its educational programs, 
activities, or with respect to employment or admission to the University’s educational programs and activities. 
This policy is in accord with local, state, and federal laws, including Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, Section 504 
of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, the Americans with Disabilities Act, Age Discrimination Act of 1975, and 
the Pittsburgh Human Relations Act. Inquiries regarding these regulations and policies, or complaints, should 
be  referred  to  Point  Park’s  vice  president  of  human  resources,  phone  number  412-392-  4727,  the  U.S. 
Department of Education’s Office of Civil Rights, or both. Inquiries about Title IX may be referred to Point 
Park University’s Title IX Coordinator, the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Civil Rights, or both. 
Point Park University’s Title IX Coordinator is Stephanie Stark Poling, sstarkpoling@pointpark.edu, 412-392-
3980, 201 Wood Street, Student Center, Room 104(A), Pittsburgh, PA 15222. 

Point  Park  University’s  Title  IX  nondiscrimination  policy  and  grievance  procedures  can  be  located  at: 

https://www.pointpark.edu/studentlife/titleix/index. 

Reports of violations of this policy, including reports of conduct that may constitute sex discrimination, 
or complaints of sex  discrimination under  Title  IX can  be  filed via the  Incident Reporting  Form online  at 
pointpark.edu/incidentreport  and  will  be  processed  by  the  University  Office  of  Compliance  and  Integrity. 
Complaints may also be emailed to oci@pointpark.edu. 

Accessibility Services 

It  is  the  intention  of  Point  Park  University  to  provide  appropriate,  reasonable  accommodations  for 
students  who  are  disabled  in  accordance  with  the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Act  (ADA)  of  1990  and 
the  Americans  with  Disabilities  Amendment  Act  of  2008.  Campus  accommodations  for  students  are 
coordinated through  the  Office  of  A c c e s s i b i l i t y   S e r v i c e s   located  on  the  first  floor  of  the  Student 
Center. Students should contact the Office of Accessibility Services by email at accessibility@pointpark.edu or 
phone at 412-392-8077 or consult the website for specific  information  on  the  University’s  policy  and  the 
procedures 
requesting  reasonable 
f o r  
accommodations, and the appeals process. 

verifying  disabilities, 

r e g i s t e r i n g  

s e r v i c e s ,  

for 

Because students’ needs vary, accommodations are determined on a case-by-case basis. Therefore, after the 
appropriate documentation has been provided, students participate in an initial intake meeting. After careful 
review of documentation, consideration of interview findings, and if needed, consultation with the student’s 
healthcare  provider/evaluator,  University  faculty/staff,  and/or  external  resources,  a  determination  of 
appropriate and reasonable accommodations will be made. 

Students should  discuss any concerns related to  the  provision of reasonable accommodations with the 
Office  of  Accessibility  Services.  A  student  having  a  complaint  or  concern  related  to  services  or  reasonable 
accommodations may also initiate the appeals process. A student who is dissatisfied with the outcome of the 
University appeals process or who wishes to pursue an alternative may file a complaint against the University 
with the Office of Civil Rights or in a court. 

13 

 
 
 
Regional and Professional Accreditation and Approval 
Point Park University is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education, 3624 Market 
Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.  19104,  267-284-5000.  Point  Park  University  is  also  approved  by  the  Pennsylvania 
Department of Education, 333 Market Street, Harrisburg, Pa. 17126-0333, 717-783-6788. 

The Business programs in the following degrees are accredited by the International Assembly of Collegiate 

Business Education, P.O. Box 25217, Overland Park, KS, 66225, 913-631-3009. 

•  Master of Business Administration degree 
•  Bachelor  of  Science  post-baccalaureate  degrees  in  Accounting,  Business  Management,  Human 

Resource Management 

•  Bachelor of Science in Accounting; Business Management; Business; Economics and Finance; Hu-

man Resource Management; Sports, Arts, Entertainment and Music Business 

The programs in the School of Education leading to the Bachelor of Arts and the Bachelor of Sciences in 
Early  Childhood  Education,  Elementary,  and  Secondary  Education,  as  well  as  the  programs  leading  to  the 
Master  of  Arts  in  Curriculum  and  Instruction  and  the  Master  of  Arts  in  Educational  Administration,  are 
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Education, 333 Market Street, Harrisburg, PA 17126-0333, 717- 
783-6788. 

The Doctor of Education in Leadership and Administration is an approved program by the Pennsylvania 
Department of Education. Point Park  University’s School  of Education  can recommend candidates for the 
Pennsylvania  State  Certificate  for  School  Principal  (K-12)  or  Superintendent  Letter  of  Eligibility  to  those 
students who meet all of the state’s requirements. 

Programs in the Conservatory leading to the Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Fine Arts in Dance, and to 
the Bachelor of Arts and Post-Baccalaureate Bachelor of Arts in Dance Pedagogy, are accredited by the National 
Association of Schools of Dance, 11250 Roger Bacon Drive, Suite 21, Reston, VA 20190, 703-437-0700. 

The programs leading to the Bachelor of Science degree with majors in Civil, Electrical, and Mechanical 
Engineering Technology are accredited by the Engineering Technology Accreditation Commission of ABET 
(www.abet.org). 415 North Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, 410-347-7700. 

14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ADMISSION 

Point  Park  University  welcomes  undergraduate  applications  for  full-time  or  part-time  admission  from 
students who wish to enter the University as freshmen or transfer students. Part-time students are those who 
intend to take fewer than 12 semester hours per semester. 

International students may apply for admission to Point Park University as full-time freshmen, transfer or 
post-baccalaureate students. Full-time attendance for international students in F-1 non-immigrant visa status is 
required  by  the  United  States  Immigration  and  Naturalization  Service  (INS).  Point  Park  University  admits 
students to each of the three terms during the academic year: Fall, Spring, or Summer. The decision to admit a 
student is based upon a variety of factors and is described in the following sections. 

The Financial Aid section of this catalog provides information on the extensive benefits available at Point 
Park University and outlines the procedures for applying for financial aid. Prospective students should contact 
the Financial Aid Office for specific information about obtaining assistance. 

Full-Time Studies 

All  students  who  are  interested  in  attending  Point  Park  University  are  invited  to  visit  the  University. 
Parents and friends are encouraged to join students for visits, which include a tour of the University and a 
meeting between an  Admission counselor  and the student.  Meetings  with the Financial  Aid  Office, with  a 
department representative, or classroom visits can be arranged. 

Admitted students to Point Park University are required to participate in orientation. Specific details about 
this orientation program will be sent to all students who have submitted their admission deposit prior to the 
term of entry. 

First Year Students 

Students interested in entering Point Park University as first year students are considered for admission 
based on their academic ability. Applicants are evaluated based on secondary school performance, the types 
of courses taken, and the grades earned. Standardized national tests, such as the SAT and the American 
College Test (ACT), provide a means of predicting academic success at Point Park University but are not used 
to determine admission. Personal qualities and achievements which include participation in extra-curricular 
activities, community involvement, and the recommendation of guidance counselors, teachers, and others 
who know the applicant well are encouraged to be shared but not used to make admission decisions. 

All applications for Admission are reviewed for an admission decision. No applicant is automatically denied ad- 

mission. Point Park does not offer early decision to its first year applicants. 

A recommended college preparatory curriculum includes: 

• 
• 
• 
• 

4 years of English 
3 years of math including Algebra I, Algebra II, and Geometry 
3 years of history or social science 
3 years of science to include 1 year of a laboratory science 

Admission into the Foundations for Success Program 

Freshmen  applicants  not  meeting  Admission  requirements  may  be,  upon  review  by  the  admission 
committee, offered admission into our Foundations for Success Program. Visit the University Advising Center 
webpage for additional information. 

Applying for Admission 

The documents required for a completed application include an application form, an official secondary 
and school transcript. The application fee is: paper - $40; online - free. All freshmen admission candidates must 
have completed an academic program in secondary studies or, in the judgment of 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Admission Committee, have achieved an equivalent competence prior to matriculation. 

Dual Enrollment 

A student with an exceptional academic record (3.0 GPA or higher) and a recommendation from high 
school officials and parents may apply for early admission at the end of the junior year. It is recommended that 
students interested in dual enrollment take the SAT in March or May of their junior year in high school. 

Admission with Transfer Credits 

Students who enter with first year status may be eligible for admission with advanced standing. Credits 
may be granted for the Advanced Placement (AP) Examination Program of the College Board. High school 
students who are taking classes at a college or university may be eligible for transfer credits. Credits earned at 
other colleges and universities are evaluated in accordance with the Point Park University equivalency standards 
and applied to the program chosen by the student. The courses to be transferred must be equivalent in content 
and hours to those offered by Point Park University.  The grades must be a “C-” or above. 

Students completing the International Baccalaureate Program with an IB Diploma with an international 

baccalaureate exam may receive transfer credits. 

For more information about Advanced Standing, contact the Office of the University Registrar. 

Test Blind 

Point Park University is a test blind admission school. Whether or not a student decides to send their 

test scores, they won’t be considered as part of the application evaluation. 

NOTE: In addition to receiving academic admittance to the University, applicants to the Conservatory are also 
required to successfully complete the artistic review process specific to the program/department for which they 
are applying. 
Additional 
https://www.pointpark.edu/academics/schools/copa/index  

is  available  on  our  website: 

review  process 

the  artistic 

information 

regarding 

Transfer Students 

Point  Park  University  accepts  applications  from  students  who  have  attended  an  accredited  two-year 
technical school, two-year community college, or four-year institution of higher education. Admission decisions 
are made shortly after a candidate’s application is completed. 

Credit for College Level Courses 

Credit for college-level courses or workshops may be granted to students who have successfully completed 
courses or workshops for college credit and who submit for consideration an official transcript of the academic 
credits earned. Eligible students include those who have completed such courses while  attending secondary 
school as well as transfer students from an accredited two-year technical school, junior or community college, 
and four-year institution of higher education. Credits earned at other colleges or universities are evaluated in 
accordance with the Point Park University equivalency standards and applied to the program chosen by the 
student. The courses to be transferred must be equivalent in content and hours to those offered by Point Park 
University. The grades must be “C-” or above. 

Credit may also be granted for the College-Level Examination Program (CLEP), Advanced Placement Ex- 
aminations for Point Park University courses, Armed Services courses, Defense Activity for Non-Traditional 
Education Support (DANTES), Straighter Line, and Applied knowledge Learning. 

Veterans 
Applying for Admission 

Veterans should submit the application for admission and have educational records from high school and 
any other educational institution attended sent to the Office of Admission. An interview with an admission 
counselor is recommended for all applicants and will be required if it is determined that a veteran has not met 
the regular admissions requirements.

16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Military Deployment Policy for Point Park University 

Point Park University has established a policy to assist military personnel who may be called to active duty 
during an academic semester. The purpose of this policy is to provide guidelines regarding grading, withdrawals, 
and tuition and fees. The student must notify the Office of the University Registrar in writing of the activation 
order. The Military Leave of Absence Request should be completed. The form is located in the Office of the 
University Registrar. The student will remain on the program guide for his or her degree upon return unless 
the degree program has significantly changed, and the student’s advisor and/or department chair recommends 
that the student move to an updated program guide. 

The student can select from the following three options: 
1.  Grading: 

A.  A student can receive the grade he or she has earned to date in the enrolled class provided that more 
than 75 percent of the class meetings have expired, and both the faculty and student agree upon this 
option.  The appropriate credits for the course and grade will be assigned in the official grading period 
at the end of the semester. A student selecting this option will not be refunded any tuition or fees. 
B.  A student can ask for an Incomplete (I grade) at the end of the course if both the faculty and student 
agree upon this option. The student and faculty will need to discuss the completion requirements for 
the course. A student selecting the incomplete grade option will have one year after return from active 
duty to contact the University to make arrangements to complete the course requirements and thus 
remove the I grade.* If the incomplete is not satisfied by this time, the grade will be converted to an 
“F” or other grade agreed upon by the faculty member and student when the incomplete grade request 
was made. The student selecting this option will not be refunded any tuition or fees. 
*Any student who has received an Incomplete (I) grade, and whose course has been discontinued, or if 
the faculty member is no longer with the University, should contact the department chair to arrange 
for completion of the course. 

2.  Withdrawals: 

A student can elect to withdraw from one or all courses with a “W” grade at any time during the semester 
in which military activation occurs by informing the University Registrar.  If the student selects this option, 
his/her tuition and fees will be refunded or credited in full, without credits awarded for this term. Students 
need to be aware that choosing this option may result in the need to return funds to the University. 

3.  Residence Hall and other fees: 

Students  who  are  in  a  residence  hall  at  Point  Park  University  may  at  any  time  during  the  semester  of 
military  activation  be  released  from  their  contract  for  room  and  board.  These  and  other  fees  will  be 
refunded for the unused portion of the contract on a pro rata basis. 

Leave of Absence & Re-Admission 

A student must fill out a Leave of Absence form if the student is a) full-time or part-time and will miss one 
semester or b) online and will miss two consecutive eight-week sessions.  Failure to do so will require the student 
to go through readmission in the Office of Admission and to follow the program of study in effect during the 
term of return. 

A student must have a cumulative G.P.A. of 2.0 or above to apply for a leave of absence.  A student granted a 
leave of absence may return and maintain the same degree requirements that the student was following during 
the student’s last term of attendance at the University. Any university financial aid will be maintained. There 
is no guarantee about State or Federal financial aid. Please see the Office of Financial Aid for more information. 
If  a  student  extends  a  leave  of  absence  beyond  one-year,  the  student  will  be  required  to  apply  for 
readmission to the University and will be assigned to the more current degree requirements for the student’s 
major if that program is available. If the program is no longer available, the student will be required to choose 
a new program. 

A Leave of Absence form is not equivalent to a complete withdrawal. This is a separate process which must 

17 

 
 
 
be submitted in the Office of the University Registrar within the published deadlines. 

Former students re-applying for admission to the University are subject to the same fees and evaluation 
processes as first-time applicants. Re-admitted students will continue their studies under the provisions of the 
graduation  requirements  in  effect  when  they  return  to  the  University.  If  the  desired  degree’s  program  has 
substantially changed, the student may be moved to new degree requirements. 

Acceptance of Offer of Admission 

All applicants admitted as full-time students are required to pay a tuition deposit to reserve a place in the 
academic program of their choice. This fee is credited to tuition charges incurred in the first semester. Non- 
refundable deposits for fall are due May 1 and non-refundable spring deposits are due December 1. 

Part-Time Studies 

Undergraduate students enrolled in fewer than 12 credits per semester are part-time students. Part-time 

students have access to online, day, and evening classes and to all University facilities and services. 

Applicants  wishing  to  enter  Point  Park  University  as  undergraduate  part-time  students  must  submit  a 
completed  admission  application  with  the  appropriate  documentation.  The  application  fee  is  waived  if  the 
application is submitted online. Part-time applicants are exempt from the full-time requirement of submitting 
SAT or ACT scores; however, all applicants using the General Equivalency Diploma (G.E.D.) test as a basis for 
admission must submit a record of their test scores. 

The  University  reserves  the  right  to  require  an  interview  or  supplementary  materials  for  any  applicant 

(degree or non-degree) and to use these as a means for making an admission decision. 

Acceptance of Offer of Admission 

All applicants admitted as part-time students are required to pay a tuition deposit to reserve a place in the 
aca demic program of their choice. This fee is credited to charges incurred in the first semester.  Deposits are 
non-refundable. 

Online Programs 

The Graduate Admissions Office facilitates online program admission. Office hours are 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 
p.m.  Monday  –  Friday.  An  applicant  wishing  to  learn  more about  online  programs  should  visit 
http://online.pointpark.edu or call 888-495-4144.

18 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International Student Services and Enrollment  

Students who are not citizens of or do not hold permanent residency in the U.S. are required to apply to 

Point Park University to study under a U.S. government visa.  

Point Park University reviews each application according to its merits and with sensitivity to the cultural 
and education background of the applicant. The criteria take into consideration the differences that exist be- 
tween educational systems throughout the world. The International Student Services and Enrollment (ISSE) 
examine each application on an individual basis.  

Certain criteria, however, must be met by all degree applicants. Applicants must be graduates of secondary 
or post-secondary level accredited institutions. In assessing each applicant’s transcript, attention also is given to 
demonstrated success in such subjects as the sciences and arts, mathematics, social sciences, global studies, the 
arts, and humanity courses.  

International students interested in the University’s degree programs who are entering as transfer or post-
baccalaureate  students are evaluated primarily upon their academic success and potential  as determined by 
their post-secondary school transcripts.  

Application requirements for all programs (Bachelor, Masters, and Doctoral) can be found on the  ISSE 
webpage and outlines grade point requirements, English proficiency, and supporting documentation for ad- 
mission into a Point Park University academic program.  

Transfer Credit Evaluation  

International Students who have completed some post-secondary education either in the United States or 
abroad may be eligible for credit transfer to Point Park University. International students wishing to receive 
credits from institutions abroad should submit their original transcripts and description (or syllabus) of the 
post-secondary courses. International student who has completed secondary education or are transferring from 
a university located outside  of the United States  are required at cost to  them to have  a certified credential 
evaluation of transcripts using an NACES accredited services sent directly to Point Park University. Companies 
approved by PPU are located on our webpages: Transfer Requirements.  

We  do  not  accept  transcripts  from  students  for  admission  or  transfer  credit  purposes.  The  Registrar’s 
Office reviews the documents and makes recommendations for the number of credits that can be transferred. 
The Registrar’s Office makes the final determination and approves all transfer credits. After the review process, 
the students will receive a Transfer Credit Evaluation (TCE) of their program which will indicate the number 
of transfer credits accepted by the University.  

Point  Park  University  will  award  credits  for  candidates  completing  Higher  Level  (HL)  courses  in 
International  Baccalaureate  programs.  An  official  IB  transcript  must  be  sent  to  consider  awarding  transfer 
credits.  

The  International  Student  Services  and  Enrollment  reviews  all  completed  applications  for  admission. 
Students  will  be  notified  of  the  admission  decision  via  e-mail  immediately  after  a  review  of  the  completed 
application has taken place.  

Students who have been admitted to Point Park University will receive a formal letter of acceptance, and 
the Certificate of Eligibility Form I-20, if the necessary deposits and proof of financial are submitted. The I-20 
will be necessary to obtain the F-1 student visa from the United States Embassy or Consulate in the student’s 
country.  

Upon receipt of the letter of acceptance, the students must submit the nonrefundable University tuition 
deposit that guarantees a place in the University and is credited to the student’s first term tuition charges. An 
additional deposit is also required if the students wish to reside on campus.  

19 

 
  
STUDENT ACCOUNTS 
Billing and Payment Information 

The  Office  of Student  Accounts is primarily responsible  for  billing  and collection of tuition, fees, and 
room and board charges. In addition to billing and collections, the office assists  students and families with 
obtaining financial clearance. 

Financial clearance is the University’s term for satisfying the balance due on the student’s account. 
Financial clearance can be obtained by making payment in full, securing financial aid including loans to 

cover the balance, enrolling in a payment plan, or using a combination of multiple options. 

The Office is open from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. 

Phone: 412-392-3424 
Email: studentaccounts@pointpark.edu  
Location:1st Floor Thayer Hall  
Website: pointpark.edu/studentaccounts 

University Charges 

University charges including tuition, fees, housing and meals are available on the University’s website.  The 

University reserves the right to alter the tuition and fee schedule without notice. 

Point Park reserves the right to amend the content of courses, its course offerings, scheduling, and modality 
of instruction. The tuition and fees associated with your education apply regardless of the mode of instruction, 
whether ultimately delivered in-person or otherwise. Tuition and fees will not be refunded in the event that 
on-ground instruction occurs remotely for any part of the academic year unless otherwise permitted under the 
Tuition and Fees Refund Policy set in the course catalog applicable to a student’s program. 

Mandatory Fees 
The following are mandatory fees charged by the University: 
University Fee  
Activity Fee  
Technology Fee  
Health Services Fee Orientation Fee 

Detailed fee information is available on the University’s website. 

Overload Charges 

Full-time undergraduate students registered for more than 18 credits are charged additional tuition on a 

per-credit basis for each credit over 18.  The overload charges are in addition to the full-time tuition/fees. 

Specialized Instructional Fees 

Some  courses  at  the  University  require  specialized  instruction  over  and  above  the  usual  classroom 
presentations. Courses in this category may include independent study classes, private voice and private piano 
lessons, labs, certificates, and any classes that include field trips and/or other activities that create ongoing costs 
to the University. 

For courses in programs of this nature a Specialized Instructional Fee is charged in addition to the cost of 
the actual credits involved. These fees are based on the proportionately higher cost of offering the course, not 
on any specific activity included in any given semester. Therefore, these fees are not refundable in whole or in 
part, except in cases of withdrawal from the course by the final day for 100% reduction of tuition and fees. 

Specialized Instructional Fees are published each semester with the schedule of classes. 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Double Majors 

Students who are completing a major in a Conservatory program and also are completing a second major 
in a program in the School of Arts and Sciences, Communication, Education, or Business will be charged the 
tuition rate for all credits taken at the Conservatory program rate. The Conservatory rate would apply to all 
credits, including overload credits. 

Financial Responsibility Agreement 

Students  who  register  for  courses  at  Point  Park  University,  either  online  or  by  sending  appropriate 
information to an advisor for registration, are agreeing to pay all charges on the student account when due. 
Students also acknowledge that failure to make a required payment by the stated due date  may result in late 
payment charges, inability to register for a future semester/term, and/or withholding of a transcript and/or 
diploma. Collection charges may also be a result of nonpayment. Further, this debt could be considered an 
educational loan with collection fees up to 66.9%. By signing this document “under seal” you are aware that 
collection activities may continue for up to 20 years. This is a non-dischargeable debt. 

All students who register for courses at Point Park University must agree to the financial responsibility 
agreement. Students will agree to the terms and conditions upon signing into PointWeb. The agreement is 
available for print on the University’s website, pointpark.edu/policies and on PointWeb. 

E-billing and Payment Schedule 

In an attempt to improve our sustainability efforts and streamline the billing process, the Office of Student 
Accounts  will  send  monthly  email  reminders  (e-bills)  regarding  students'  accounts  and  payment  due  dates. 
Paper invoices are not mailed. 

All University charges including  tuition, fees,  housing, and  meals, are due prior to the first day of the 
semester/term.  Due  dates  are  posted  on  the  University’s  website,  pointpark.edu/studentaccounts.  If 
registration, charges or financial aid changes after the due date, payment is due immediately. 

Students must receive a financial clearance each semester/term. The Office of Student Accounts may assess 
monthly late fees to any student account that is not paid in full or accounts that have not made official payment 
arrangements by the due date. 

Monthly Payment Plans 

Point Park University offers interest-free payment plan options for students who want to budget for tuition 
and  other  direct  costs  through  monthly  payments.  A  payment  plan  enrollment  fee  is  charged  each  time  a 
student enrolls in a payment plan. For detailed information on payment plans, students are encouraged to view 
the University website, pointpark.edu/paymentplans or contact the Office of Student Accounts. 

Employer Deferred Tuition Program 

Employer  reimbursed  students  may  defer  payment  of  charges  by  enrolling  in  the  University  Employer 
Deferred  Tuition  program.  The  deferred  amount  is  limited  to  the  amount  reimbursed  by  the  student’s 
employer.  Students  must  submit  the  Employer  Deferred  Tuition  Agreement,  the  deferment  fee,  and 
confirmation of employer benefits to participate. For more detailed information on the Employer Deferred 
program students are encouraged to view the University website, pointpark.edu/employerdeferred or contact 
the Office of Student Accounts. 

Payment Methods 

The  University accepts multiple  payment methods.  Check or  money order  payments can  be  mailed or 
made  in-person  in  the  Office  of  Student  Accounts.  Payments  can  also  be  made  online  with  a  MasterCard, 
Discover Card, Visa Card,  American Express, or eCheck. A processing fee is added to all credit/debit card 
transactions.  Visit  the  University’s  website  for  the  current  processing  fee.  There  is  no  charge  for  eCheck 
transactions. The University will accept cash payment in-person only. A secure payment drop box is located 
outside of the Office of Student Accounts for check and money order payments made after business hours.  All 
checks returned from the bank will be assessed a service charge in addition to the amount of the check. For the 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
returned check service fee amount, visit the University website, pointpark.edu/policies. 

Tuition and Fees Refund Policy 

Refunds to students are computed because of the official date of withdrawal certified by the Office of the 
University Registrar. It is the responsibility of the student to notify the Office of the University Registrar in 
writing on the day of withdrawal and inquire with the Office of Student Accounts about a refund. Refunds of 
tuition will not be made to students who are suspended or dismissed. Withdrawing or dropping courses may 
affect a student’s financial aid awards; therefore, students should always meet with the Office of Financial Aid 
when considering a drop or withdrawal. 

Tuition and fees are refunded as follows. 
Fall and Spring 15-week Courses 
Refund 
1-7 calendar days, inclusive –all fees ........................................................ 100% 8- 
8-14 calendar days, Tuition Only ............................................................ 50% 
More than 14 calendar days ..................................................................... None 

Courses less than 15 weeks 
Final Day of Schedule Change period, inclusive –all fees ...................... 100% 

Summer Sessions (Six- and Twelve-week Terms) 
1-7 calendar days, inclusive ...................................................................... 100% 
More than 7 calendar days ....................................................................... None 

Fully Online Programs 
Final day of Schedule Change period, inclusive –all fees ....................... 100% 

Room and Board Refund Policy 

Single rooms are available on a limited basis. Priority is given to students with junior or senior status.  
For new students, there is a maintenance fee. This is a one-time fee for normal wear and tear associated 
with living in the residence halls. The maintenance fee is non-refundable after May 1. If a refund of the fee is 
granted, it will be refunded according to the university’s policy on student refunds. 

Returning  students  (those  who  have  already  lived  in  the  residence  halls)  must  complete  and  submit  a 

Returning Student  Housing and Meal Plan Contract every academic year to participate in room selection. 

Tuition deposit and residence hall maintenance fee amounts are listed on the University’s website. 
Any student who voluntarily moves out of the residence halls after taking occupancy of the room and prior 

to the end of the term, will be subject to the following refund schedule: 

First  calendar  week:  90%   
Second  calendar  week:  75%   
Third  calendar  week:  50%   
Fourth  calendar  week:  no refund 

22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL AID 

The Office of Financial Aid is open 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.  Monday – Friday, and select Saturdays through- 

out the year. 

Financial Aid: Full-Time Students 

To make it possible for full-time students to take advantage of the educational opportunities at Point Park 
University, the Office of Financial Aid coordinates a variety of merit and need-based financial assistance pro- 
grams.  Scholarships,  grants,  loans,  and  employment  are  available  from  a  variety  of  federal,  state,  and 
institutional sources. 

The steps outlined below explain how to apply for all forms of financial aid: 

1. Be admitted Point Park University. 

2. Complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). Completing this form will enable students 
to  be  considered  for all  federally funded  Title  IV programs,  including  the Federal Pell Grant Program, the 
Federal  Direct  Stafford  Loan  Program,  financial  aid  from  Point  Park  University  sources,  and,  for 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania residents, the Pennsylvania State Grant Program. The FAFSA is available online 
at www.studentaid.gov. The student should list Point Park University on the FAFSA, with the Title IV Code of 
003357. 

The federal government randomly selects some student applications for verification. Those students will 
be required to submit a copy of the federal tax transcript If needed, a copy of the student’s tax transcript may 
be requested directly from the Internal Revenue Service (www.irs.gov). The student and parent should retain 
copies of any financial information used to complete the FAFSA in the event that they are requested by our 
office. 

Determining the Financial Aid Award 

All financial aid awards are made in compliance with federal, state, and institutional policies. 
Financial aid awards for full-time students at Point Park University are determined on the basis of academic 
achievement, artistic or athletic talent and/or financial need. Point Park University develops a financial aid 
budget that takes into consideration direct costs (tuition, fees, room/board) and indirect costs (supplies, travel, 
and personal expenses). 

The Expected Family Contribution (EFC) is determined through a standard called Federal Methodology, 
which measures a family’s ability to pay for higher education. The FAFSA is used to collect data needed to 
perform the needs analysis calculations. To determine a student’s financial aid eligibility, the University sub- 
tracts the student’s EFC from his/her budget and awards funds available through federal, state, and institutional 
aid programs. The University may not be able to meet full financial need as determined by the FAFSA. 

All recipients of Federal Funds are subject to the Return of Title IV funds policy if they totally withdraw 

from all classes. 

Scholarships and Awards 

Scholarships and Awards for School of Arts and Sciences, School of Business 
and School of Communication Freshmen 

Scholarships  below  are  applicable  to  both  domestic  (U.S.  Citizens  and  eligible  non-citizens)  and 
international students. They are considered to be merit aid and offset the cost of tuition and fees only. Point 
Park University awards academic merit scholarships to students with qualifying GPA and standardized test scores 
or who qualify under the test optional admission criteria. The awards are listed on our website. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Scholarships and Awards for School of Arts and Sciences, School of Business 
and School of Communication Transfer Students 

Scholarships  below  are  applicable  to  both  domestic  (U.S.  Citizens  and  eligible  non-citizens)  and 
international students. They are merit aid and offset the cost of tuition and fees only. In order to retain the 
scholarship each year, the student must meet the Satisfactory Academic Progress guidelines and a minimum 
GPA of 2.0. 

Please refer to our website for more information. 

Scholarships and Awards for Conservatory Freshmen and Transfers 

Students  majoring  in  a  Conservatory  program  must  be  admitted  both  academically  and  artistically. 
Academic admittance is granted by the University Office of Admission. Artistic admittance is granted by the 
Conservatory,  which  requires  successful  completion  of  the  artistic  review  process  specific  to  each 
program/department. 

Conservatory scholarships and awards are merit-based and may be used to offset the cost of tuition and 
fees only. Conservatory scholarships are applicable to both domestic (U.S. Citizens and eligible non-citizens) 
and  international  students.  Conservatory  scholarships  and  awards  are  granted  at  the  discretion  of  the 
Conservatory and are non-negotiable. 

Please refer to this link. 

Artistic Achievement Award 

First year and transfer Conservatory applicants who demonstrate a high caliber of artistic ability through 
the artistic review process are eligible to receive the Artistic Achievement Award. The Artistic Achievement 
Award  is  awarded  annually  (Fall  and  Spring  semesters).  Additional  information  regarding  the  Artistic 
Achievement award is available on our website. 

Dean’s Academic Scholarship 
For Conservatory First Year Students 

The Dean’s Academic Scholarship is awarded annually (Fall and Spring semesters) to full-time first year 

students who meet the certain criteria. Please refer to this link. 

For Conservatory Transfers 

Full-time transfer applicants are also eligible to receive the Deans’ Academic Award. Website information 

can be found here. 

Note: Total merit scholarship amount for any Conservatory applicant cannot exceed the maximum range for 
their respective artistic award level. Candidates are notified of award amounts in the artistic decision letter. 

Additional Awards 
Athletic Scholarships 

Point Park University offers athletic scholarships as part of the NCAA Division II. We have competitive 
sports in men’s and women’s basketball, men’s and women’s cross country, men’s baseball, men’s and women’s 
golf, men’s and women’s lacrosse, men’s and women’s soccer, women’s softball, men’s and women’s track and 
field,  men’s  and  women’s  wrestling,  and  women’s  volleyball.  Contact  the  Athletic  Department  for  more 
information. 

Donor Supported Scholarships 

Several donor supported scholarships are available to current Point Park University students who have 
completed at lease 12 credits at Point Park University. These scholarships are made possible by the generous 
donations of alumni, faculty, and friends of the University.  Applications for scholarships and further details 
are  provided  at  Donor  Supported  Scholarships.  The  application  period  is  mid-December  through  early 
February. 

24 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Changing your major may affect the amount of financial aid offered. 

Grants 

Point Park University Grant 

Point Park University Grants are awarded on the basis of demonstrated financial need. The amount of the 
award  is  based  on  the  level  of  the  student’s  financial  need  and  the  availability  of  funds.  All  students  who 
complete a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) will be considered for this funding. 

Federal Pell Grant 

The Federal Pell Grant Program provides assistance to students who demonstrate financial need according 
to economic criteria and program requirements established by the federal government. To be eligible students 
must enroll in a degree or approved certificate/diploma program and be matriculated for their first bachelor’s 
degree. There is a limit to the amount of Federal Pell Grant Funding you can receive during your education. 
You will be notified by the Department of Education if you are at your lifetime eligibility limit. 

Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant (FSEOG) 

This program is funded by the U.S. Department of Education and administered by Point Park University 
to aid students with exceptional financial need. Students with high need who qualify for a Federal Pell Grant 
are considered for this grant. 

Pennsylvania State Grant Program* 

The Pennsylvania State Grant is a resource available to Pennsylvania state residents who are enrolled at 
least a half-time (6 credits per semester). Eligibility is based on income information and dependency status as 
reported on a student’s Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and reviewed by the Pennsylvania 
Higher Education Assistance Agency (PHEAA). 

*Students who are not residents of Pennsylvania may be eligible for similar grants from their own state 
agencies. Among the states currently offering grants that may be used by students attending Point Park University 
are Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Ohio, Rhode Island, Vermont, West Virginia, 
and Maine. To arrange for such state grants, students should contact their appropriate state agency. 

Student Employment 

Students attending Point Park University in a degree program may be eligible for student employment up 
to  a  maximum  of  20  hours  per  week  while  in  school.  Many  students  take  advantage  of  these  employment 
opportunities, recognizing the personal and professional benefits that come from working. 

Federal Work Study Program (FWSP) 

The federal government and Point Park University subsidize the FWSP. Eligible students may be employed 

during the academic year according to the guidelines established for this program. 
The Financial Aid Office determines award amounts based on demonstrated need. Students interested in the 
program are encouraged to contact the Financial Aid Office for more information and program requirements. 

Point Park University General Work 

The University may have a limited number of general part-time work positions available to students for 
employment  within  the  institution.  Students  should  contact  the  Office  of  Human  Resources  for  more 
information and application materials. 

Student Loans 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Student loan programs make it possible for individuals to borrow funds to help cover a portion of their 
educational expenses. These loans, which offer long-term repayment and low-interest rates, enable students to 
postpone the cost of education until after graduation. 

Federal Direct Loans 

The federal government has maximum loan limits available to students on an annual and aggregate (life- 
time) basis  for undergraduate education.  Students may borrow up to $5,500 per year as first year students, 
$6,500 per year as sophomores, and $7,500 per year as juniors and seniors. The maximum lifetime borrowing 
limit  as  a  dependent  undergraduate  student  is  $31,000.  There  are  separate  maximums  for  subsidized  and 
unsubsidized loans.  Subsidized loans are based on financial need and the federal government pays the interest 
while the student is in school. Unsubsidized loans accrue interest while the student is in school and during the 
six-month grace period. Students may pay the interest and principal or defer both on unsubsidized loans while 
enrolled in school. Repayment of principal and interest for both types of loans begins six months after the 
student graduates, withdraws, or drops below 6 credits per term. 

Independent students, graduate/professional students, and some dependent undergraduate students for 
whom  it  is  documented  that  their  parent(s)  cannot  obtain  a  Federal  PLUS  Loan,  are  eligible  to  receive 
additional unsubsidized loans on an annual and aggregate basis. 

Federal Parent Loan for Undergraduate Students (FPLUS) 

The FPLUS loan enables parents of dependent undergraduate students to borrow up to the full amount 
of a Point Park University education minus other aid. The annual interest rate is variable and determined on 
July 1 of each year. A credit check is performed to determine eligibility. 

Private Loans 

A student may choose any lender when borrowing a private student loan. It is crucial though that you 
select a lender and a loan that best suits your academic and financial needs, since there may be differences in 
interest rates, fees, credit evaluation, academic progress requirements, repayment terms, and borrower benefits. 
The list of lenders is available through a variety of websites. This summary information is intended only 
as a guide for comparison purposes.  Many other  options exist for supplemental borrowing. You are  NOT 
required to use any of the loans or lenders listed on this guide. 
•  ELMSelect: http://www.elmselect.com 
• 

Pennsylvania Student Choice: http://pennsylvania.studentchoice.org/ 

Student Lending Code of Conduct 

Point Park University is committed to providing students and their families with the best information and 
processing alternatives available regarding student borrowing. In support of this and in an effort to rule out 
any perceived or actual conflict of interest between Point Park University officers, employees or agents and 
education loan lenders, Point Park University has adopted the Lender Code of Conduct. 

26 

 
 
 
 
 
Financial Aid Programs: Part-Time Students 

Point Park University administers a generous and comprehensive program of financial aid for part-time 
students.  The  University  also  participates  in  tuition  reimbursement  programs  available  from  many  of  the 
region’s corporations. 

All recipients of federal funds are subject to the Return of the Title IV Funds policy if they totally withdraw 

from all classes. 

Federal Pell Grant 

The Federal Pell Grant Program provides assistance to students who demonstrate financial need as a result 
of completing the FAFSA.  To be eligible, students must enroll in a degree or approved certificate program and 
have not already earned a bachelor’s degree. There is a limit to the amount of Federal Pell Grant funding you 
can receive during your education. You will be notified by the Department of Education if you are at your 
lifetime eligibility limit. Awards vary based on the student’s enrollment status (full-time, three-quarter time, 
half-time or less than half-time). 

Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant (FSEOG) 

This program is funded by the U.S. Department of Education and administered by Point Park University 
to provide assistance to students with exceptional financial need. Students with high need who qualify for a 
Federal Pell Grant are considered for this grant. 

Federal Direct Loans 

Students may apply for Federal Direct Subsidized and Unsubsidized Loans. 

Pennsylvania State Grant Program 

The PHEAA grant is a resource available to Pennsylvania state residents who are enrolled at least a half- 
time (six credits per semester). Eligibility is based on income information, dependency status and direct cost of 
attendance at Point Park University. 

Point Park University Part-Time Grant 

Point Park University offers grants to part-time students who show financial need beyond that which can 
be covered by other forms of aid assistance. The amount of the grant is determined based on the student’s 
financial need and enrollment status. These grants are available in fall, spring, and summer terms. 

All students seeking Point Park University funding must complete the Free Application for Financial Aid 

(FAFSA) form at www.studentaid.gov. 

Alumni Grant 

The  Alumni  Grant  provides  a  discount  on  undergraduate  and  graduate  courses  taken  at  Point  Park 
University by eligible students. The discount applies to tuition only. It is the responsibility of the student to 
apply for this discount prior to starting coursework at the University. For eligibility requirements and for more 
information, please contact the Office of Graduate and Online Admissions. Merit aid is to be used to offset 
the cost of tuition and fees only. 

Non-Traditional Student Scholarship 

This competition is held in the spring of each year and is open to both part-time and full-time students 
who are at least 25 years old, pursuing their first college degree, and have little or no previous college experience. 
Specific requirements can be found on the Financial Aid pages on the website. The value of this award is the 
equivalent to the cost of three credits of tuition. Contact the Office of the Provost for more information and 
application materials. Merit aid is to be used to offset the cost of tuition and fees only. 

Corporate Tuition Reimbursement 

Employees  of  companies  belonging  to  the  Pittsburgh  Downtown  Partnership  should  check  with  their 
Human Resource Office regarding special discounts available to Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership companies. 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Employees of the City of Pittsburgh receive a 20% discount of their tuition at Point Park University for 
on ground courses only. Please submit a letter confirming your employment to the Student Accounts Office to 
receive the discount. 

Corporate  sponsored  students  may  defer  payment  of  charges  by  completing  the  appropriate  semester 
Employer reimbursed Tuition Agreement form.  Students must submit the form, the application fee, and the 
letter  from  employer  to  participate.  Employer  Reimbursed  Tuition  Agreement  forms  are  available  on  the 
University website and in the Student Accounts Office. 

Federal Direct Loans 

Part-time students at Point Park University who take a minimum of six credits per semester may apply for 

a Federal Direct Loan. Loan limits, terms and conditions are the same as for full-time students. 

Financial Assistance: International Student Scholarships 
Point Park University offers scholarships to international students based on academic merit for study in 
one of its degree programs. The scholarships and awards are offered for four years of undergraduate study, 
provided the student continues to meet the original criteria stated in the award, adheres to the guidelines set 
forth by the student’s visa stipulations, and meets standards of academic progress toward completion of degree. 
International students are not eligible for federal and state grants, but education fees can be subsidized through 
employment authorized through the U.S. government and the Office of International Student Services and 
Enrollment. 

Scholarships and Awards for School of Arts and Sciences, School of Business 
and School of Communication First Year Students 

International students who take the SAT or ACT exams are eligible for the same scholarships as domes- 
tic students. Please see that section of the catalog for additional details regarding GPA and SAT and/or ACT 
requirements. Please refer to the website for further details. 

Scholarships and Awards for School of Arts and Sciences, School of Business 
and School of Communication Transfers 

International students who transfer into Point Park University are eligible for the same scholarship awards 

as domestic students. Please refer to the website for further details. 

Scholarships and Awards for Conservatory Freshmen and Transfers 

Students majoring in Dance, Theatre Arts, Animation & Visual Effects, Cinema Production, Digital Arts, 
and Screenwriting must be admitted both academically and artistically. Merit aid is to be used to offset the cost 
of tuition and fees only. Please refer to our website pages for the most up to date information. 

International students who take the SAT or ACT exams are eligible for the same scholarships as domes- 
tic students. Please see that section of the catalog for additional details regarding GPA and SAT and/or ACT 
requirements. 

Employment 

The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) allows all students, except ELS students, 
an opportunity to pursue the equivalency of 12 months of full-time, off-campus employment through Optional 
Practical Training (OPT) before or after completion of studies. OPT is helpful for gaining work experience in 
one’s particular field of study. Students also may enroll in Curricular Practical Training (CPT) after one year 
of full-time studies with prior approval from the academic department and the ISSE Office. CPT is work that 
is both related to the student’s academic field and is an integral part of the curriculum. 

The USCIS has established policies on employment for international students. These regulations prohibit 
international students from working off-campus without prior approval from the USCIS. However, students 

28 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
who have already completed one year of academic study, and who are experiencing severe financial hardship 
due to conditions that occurred after their arrival in the United States are allowed to request permission to 
work from the USCIS. 

Satisfactory Academic Progress for Financial Aid Eligibility 

The  U.S.  Department  of  Education  mandates  that  all  students  receiving  financial  aid  funding  must 
maintain “Satisfactory Academic Progress” (SAP) to ensure timely degree completion. This policy applies to 
both  federal  and  institutional  awards.  Some  state  grant  programs,  including  Pennsylvania,  have  different 
guidelines for measuring progress.  There are three criteria that must be met for a student to achieve Satisfactory 
Academic Progress.  They are: 
•  Maximum Timeframe to Complete the Program 
• 
•  Minimum GPA Requirement 

Successful Completion of Credits 

At Point Park University, Satisfactory Academic Progress is measured at the end of each semester. The 

semesters include fall, spring, and summer. 

Undergraduate Students 

To maintain Satisfactory  Academic Progress at Point Park  University, any full-time or part-time under- 

graduate student must meet the following requirements: 

Pace 

To meet financial aid satisfactory academic progress, any full-time or part-time undergraduate student must 
successfully complete a certain percentage of courses that have been attempted. Students who fail to pass this 
percentage while receiving financial aid will not be able to make pace toward completion of a degree. This chart 
includes courses attempted at Point Park or any other college or university. 

If you have attempted: 
1 - 29 credits 
30 - 59 credits 
60 - 89 credits 
90 or more credits 

you must have earned at least: 
60% of the total credits attempted 
67% of the total credits attempted 
67% of the total credits attempted 
67% of the total credits attempted 

Successful  completion  of  credits  will  consist  of  grades  received  of  A,  B,  C,  D,  or  P.  Any  student  who 
receives a grade of F, I, W, NP, N or NG is considered to have NOT successfully completed the  credits but 
counts as attempted credits. A student is not permitted to receive federal and institutional aid if a course has 
been attempted more than three times. 

Credits Earned & GPA Requirement 

Full-time  and  part-time  students  must  achieve  the  following  grade  point  averages  (GPA)  to  maintain 

financial aid satisfactory academic progress. 

Class 
First Years 
Sophomore 
Junior 
Senior 

Credits 
1 - 29 credits earned 
30 - 59 credits earned 
60 - 89 credits earned 
90+ credits earned 

Minimum GPA 
1.80 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0 

29 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maximum Timeframe to Complete 

Eligibility for Financial Aid is regulated by the U. S. Department of Education for a limited period of time. 
The US Department of Education requires students to complete their program within 150% of the normal 
time it would take to earn a degree. For instance, a bachelor’s degree takes 4 years (or approximately 120 credits) 
to complete, but it may take some students longer to earn their degree. The maximum length of time and/or 
attempted credits for a full-time student would be 6 years (4 x 150%) or 180 credits (120 x 150%).  Part- time 
students would be calculated accordingly. All credits from another institution are considered attempted credits 
and count toward the 180 maximum. In order to keep pace for 4-year completion, it is recommended that all 
full-time students complete at least 30 credits per academic year. 

Financial Aid Warning 

Students who do not meet these minimum academic standards will be placed on financial aid warning. 
Students can receive financial aid while on financial aid warning but must achieve the minimum standards 
prior to the completion of the next term. 

Financial Aid Suspension 

If a student does not meet the minimum academic standards at the end of the following term, the student 
will be placed on financial aid suspension. Students cannot receive any financial aid, including federal, state, 
and institutional aid while on financial aid suspension. This will require a student to enroll for courses at his 
own cost if the student remains in good academic standing according to the Academic guidelines. However, an 
appeals process to regain financial aid eligibility is available to students who have legitimate and extenuating 
circumstances, such as serious illness or injury or death of a family member. 

Financial Aid Appeals 

Financial aid suspension can be appealed to the Financial Aid Appeals Committee. Appeal forms can be 
obtained by calling or visiting the Financial Aid Office. In addition to the Appeal form, a student must also 
submit an academic plan which must demonstrate a plan for academic success. The student must meet with a 
member of the University Advising Center to construct the academic plan, which outlines future courses and 
grades  to  return  to  Satisfactory  Academic  Progress.  If  the  appeal  and  the  academic  plan  are  approved,  the 
student will be placed on financial aid probation for the number of terms that he or she successfully meets the 
academic plan or comes off of probation. If the student does not meet SAP by the end of his academic plan, 
financial aid will be terminated. 

Financial Aid Termination 

If  a  student  does  not  meet  the  specifications  of  the  academic  plan  that  was  approved  by  the  Appeals 
Committee, his/her aid will be terminated.  Aid will only be reinstated at Point Park University if the student 
regains eligibility by attaining the required GPA and credits earned. Any courses, for which the student enrolls 
while the aid is terminated, must be paid for by the student. Alternative loans are available through private 
lenders or payment plans are available through Student Accounts. 

Renewal of Financial Aid 

Annual renewal of financial aid requires that returning students file the FAFSA at  www.studentaid.gov 
and any other required documentation. Renewal application materials are sent in electronic format each fall 
semester for the next academic year. 

30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STUDENT AFFAIRS 

At Point Park University student learning continues, even after class ends. The  Office  of  Student 
Affairs  is dedicated  t o   meeting  the  multifaceted, co-curricular, and non-academic needs of Point Park 
University students. Covering a broad spectrum of support programs, activities, and organizations,  the 
Office  of  Student  Affairs  provides  services  which  address  the  career,  cultural,  health, recreational, 
social, and spiritual needs of our diverse student population. These services comprise an integral part of 
university life and are available to all Point Park University students. 

Athletics 

Point Park University has a proud tradition of intercollegiate athletics spanning more than 50 years. 
The Pioneers have achieved notable success in national tournaments, conference championships, and through 
the accomplishments of All-American and Scholar-Athlete honorees. 

As  of  July  11,  2024,  Point  Park  University  has  been  accepted  for  NCAA  Division  II  provisional 
membership. The university will now begin a three-year reclassification process, with full NCAA Division II 
membership  anticipated  in  the  2027–2028  academic  year.  During  this  transition,  Point  Park  will  fully 
implement NCAA Division II legislation and procedures. 

Pioneer Athletics now compete in the Mountain East Conference (MEC) and offer 19 varsity sports 
as part of their growing athletics program. Men’s sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, indoor 
track & field, outdoor track & field, soccer, lacrosse, and wrestling. Women’s sports include basketball, cross 
country, golf, soccer, softball, indoor track & field, outdoor track & field, volleyball, lacrosse, and wrestling. 

The mission of Point Park Athletics is to provide student-athletes the opportunity to represent their 
university  in  intercollegiate  competition  while  achieving  excellence  in  athletics,  academics,  and  community 
engagement. Student-athletes receive a well-rounded experience designed to foster personal growth and prepare 
them for success beyond their college years. 

Scholarships  are  available  to  Point  Park  student-athletes  who  meet  NCAA  Division  II  eligibility 
requirements.  These  include  full-time  enrollment,  GPA  minimums,  and  continued  progress  toward  degree 
completion. Students interested in participating on a varsity team should contact the head coach of their sport 
of interest. Tryouts may be conducted to evaluate athletic ability, and contact information for all coaches is 
available on the Point Park Athletics website. 

Point Park students receive free admission to all regular-season home sporting events. Student support 

is vital to the success of The Pioneers as they compete at a high level in NCAA Division II competition. 

To learn more, visit the Point Park Athletics website. 

Pioneer Experience (New Student Orientation) 

The  Office  of  Student  Affairs  oversees  the  University’s  new  student  orientation  program,  Pioneer 
Experience. This program is designed to help new students, and their families discover Point Park University 
by  meeting  peers,  learning  about  campus  services,  and  discovering  the  range  of  opportunities  available  in 
Downtown Pittsburgh. Pioneer Ambassadors assist students by facilitating sessions throughout the program. 
For more information visit the Pioneer Experience web pages. 

Housing and Occupancy Management 

Housing  and  Occupancy  Management  is  responsible  for  room  selection,  room  assignments,  and  room 
changes and is the liaison with Physical Plant for residence hall maintenance and repair issues. This office also 
oversees Move-In, Move-Out, and spring housing selection. For more information about residence halls, visit 
the Living on Campus web pages. 

31 

 
 
 
 
Residence Life 

One of the most exciting aspects of college life for many students is the opportunity to live in a residence 
hall. More than a place to eat and sleep, a residence hall at Point Park University means easy access to classes, 
dance studios, student lounges, the library, the Student Center, and the excitement of living in Downtown 
Pittsburgh. The residence halls at Point Park University provide an excellent environment for study, relaxation, 
and entertainment. Students who could live at home often decide to live in one of the University residence 
halls so they can enhance their total college experience. More than forty percent of the full-time students reside 
in campus housing, and a number of diverse types of residence hall accommodations are available: The Office of 
Residence Life is located on the seventh floor of the Student Center. 

David L. Lawrence Hall 

The  former  21-story  Sherwyn  Hotel  houses  approximately  420  residents;  the  ninth  through  twentieth 
floors are residence hall floors. Rooms in Lawrence Hall are single, double, or triple occupancy. Each room is 
equipped with furniture, a private bathroom, Ethernet ports, Wi-Fi access, and wall-to-wall carpeting. Laundry 
facilities  are  located  on  the  eighth  floor.  Telephone  service  is  not  provided.  Lawrence  Hall  is  a  smoke-free 
building. 

Clara Thayer Hall 

A  10-story  traditional-style  residence  hall,  Thayer  Hall  accommodates  approximately  184 residents;  the 
third  through  eighth  floors  are  residence  hall  floors.  Rooms  in  Thayer  Hall  are  single,  double,  or  triple 
occupancy with two community bathrooms on each floor. Each room is equipped with furniture, an individual 
heating/air conditioning unit, Wi-Fi access, and Ethernet ports. Telephone service is not provided. Please be 
aware that not all Thayer Hall rooms have overhead lighting; you will need to provide your own lighting for 
those rooms.  Laundry facilities are located on each floor. Thayer Hall is a smoke-free building. 

Conestoga Suites 

Conestoga Suites are suite-style housing. The floors and suites are co-ed. Each suite consists of two bed- 
rooms, two bathrooms, a living room, and a kitchenette. Each bedroom has a loft bed, dresser, standing closet, 
desk, and chair for each resident. The living room is furnished with a couch, chair, coffee table, entertainment 
center, and a table with chairs. The kitchenette is supplied with a microwave, under-counter refrigerator, and 
cabinets. Each suite has Ethernet ports and Wi-Fi access. Laundry facilities are located on each floor. Telephone 
service is not provided. Each suite is air-conditioned and is a smoke-free building. 

Boulevard Apartments 

The Boulevard Apartments are our newest residences. There are four apartments per floor: two 2-bedroom 
and two 3-bedroom. The apartments and bedrooms are co-ed, each bedroom has its own bathroom. The living 
room is furnished with a couch, chair, coffee table, entertainment center, and a table with chairs. The kitchen 
is supplied with a full-size refrigerator, stove, and dishwasher. Each apartment has Ethernet ports and Wi-Fi 
access. Telephone service is not provided. Each apartment is air-conditioned, and the building is smoke- free. 
Laundry and trash facilities are located on each floor. 

The residence halls at Point Park University are devoted to establishing positive living and learning com- 
munities for our residents. Each floor in the residence halls will develop its own set of community standards at 
its initial floor meeting through a community compact. The community compact will address issues such as 
quiet hours, guests, and general day-to-day activities on the floor. In addition to the community compact, each 
room in the residence halls will have a roommate agreement. The roommate agreement is a mutually agreed 
upon contract ratified by those who occupy any given room. Just as in the community compact, the roommate 
agreement will outline the living standards for that room. 

Residential students have access to laundry facilities and lounges. Residents are expected to provide their 
own cell phone; telephone service is not available in individual rooms. All residence hall rooms are equipped 
data network access ports. Each room has one connection for one data port per resident.  Wi-Fi is also available 
throughout the residence halls. Students are expected to provide their own cables to connect their television 

32 

 
 
 
 
 
 
to the cable TV port and their computers to the data port.  

The residence halls are open during Thanksgiving and Spring breaks. Students who prefer to remain in 
the residence halls during these periods may do so. Students may not stay in Lawrence and Thayer Halls during 
the  Winter break. Students living  in the  suites and apartments are permitted to  remain during  any and all 
semester breaks. There is no food service provided during Thanksgiving, Winter, or Spring breaks. Residents 
may leave their personal belongings in their rooms during vacation periods if they are returning to the same 
room. The  University will take  reasonable precautions during  these periods but will not be  responsible for 
student losses. When students leave the residence halls for the summer break, they must remove their movable 
property from the room. Point Park University does not provide storage. 

Students residing in the residence halls are able to enter and leave the residence halls without restrictions 
24 hours a day. The University maintains 24-hour security for the safety of the University residents. Resident 
students are required to show their Pioneer Card (student ID card) when requested by the University Police 
Department.  Resident  students  are  permitted  to  have  guests  visit  them  in  their  rooms  as  long  as  room- 
mates/suitemates do not object and are subject to the residence hall Guest Policy and the roommate agreement. 
A variety of meal plans are available to students living in the residence halls.  More information on meal plans 
and  dining  options  can  be  found  on  the  Dining  Services  web  pages.  Students  who  plan  to  reside  in  the 
University residence halls should complete the appropriate online Housing & Meal Plan Contract. It is strongly 
recommended that contracts for residency be submitted as soon as possible to ensure accommodations. 

The Office of Residence Life is responsible for room selection, room assignments, and room changes, and 

is the liaison with Physical Plant for residence hall maintenance and repair issues. This office also oversees Move-
In and Move-Out. For more information about residence halls, visit the Living on Campus web pages. 

For additional information on financial aid available to resident students, please refer to the Financial Aid 
section.  Information  regarding  residence  hall  charges  may  be  found  in  the  Student  Accounts  section  on 
University Charges. 

Residential Programming 

Residence  Life  is  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  all  residential  education  programs.  With  the 
leadership  of  Resident  Educators,  residential  students  have  the  opportunity  to  engage  in  their  community 
through various programs and activities. Resident Educators facilitate programming throughout the academic 
year  specific  to  their  academic  grade  level.  Programs  are  created  to  engage  students  in  non-academic  and 
community-based activities. 

Student Life 

The Office of Student Life is responsible for creating for all students, including commuters and residents, 
an enhanced academic experience. The Office of Student Life consists of Residence Life; the Office of Student 
Activities,  Involvement,  and  Leadership  (SAIL);  Student  Services;  and  Health  and  Counseling  Services. 
Through the programs and involvement of the various offices and departments of Student Life, all students 
will obtain citizenship and conflict-resolution skills and practice civil interaction, clarity of communication, 
and self-awareness. For more information contact the  Office of Student Life  by phone at 412-392-8026, by 
email at studentlife@pointpark.edu, visit the office on the seventh floor of the Student Center, or consult the 
Office of Student Life web pages. 

Student Activities, Involvement, and Leadership (SAIL) 

The  Office  of  Student  Activities,  Involvement,  and  Leadership  (SAIL)  is  the  campus  headquarters  for 
student activities and student organizations. The office performs a variety of functions that help maintain a 
dynamic and socially interactive campus environment where students can gather and work together to create 
fun,  exciting, and educational activities for the University community. Students can also obtain information 
about other events and activities in and around the City of Pittsburgh.  SAIL offers support to all recognized 
student organizations and serves as a resource for students to develop their leadership skills. In coordination with 
the Student Government Association (SGA), SAIL also serves as a resource for those who wish to get involved 
in student organizations on campus.  For more information visit the SAIL office on the 1st Floor of the Student 

33 

 
 
 
 
Center or contact the office by phone at 412-392-4735 or email at sail@pointpark.edu, or visit the SAIL web 
pages. 

Student Organizations 

Student clubs and organizations at Point Park University are initiated and run by students. They provide 
co-curricular  opportunities for recreation, leadership training, soft skills  development, and enhancement of 
academic  interests.  Students  learn  to  organize  and  to  work  with  others,  pursue  special  interests,  and  make 
friends. All students are welcome to start a club or organization. Two of the governing student organizations 
are the Student Government Association (SGA), the system of student governance and representation for the 
student  body  of  Point  Park  University,  and  the  Campus  Activities  Board  (CAB)  which  is  the  official 
programming organization of the Office of Student Activities, Involvement, and Leadership (SAIL). Some of 
the  other  numerous  student  organizations  include  academic  organizations  such  as  Honors  Student 
Organization, SAEM Club, Society of Professional Journalists, and Future Educators of America; interest-based 
organizations  such  as  Anime  Club,  Gender  &  Sexuality  Spectrum  Alliance,  Black  Student  Union,  and  All 
Things Horror; and service organizations such as Strong Women Strong Girls, Pioneer Pantry, and The Point 
Closet. For more information, contact SAIL by phone at 412-392-4735 or email at sail@pointpark.edu, or SGA 
at sga@pointpark.edu, or visit the Student Organizations web page. 

Student Media 

Point Park University’s student-run media outlets are open to all students and provide campus and com- 
munity news, as well as entertainment, to the University community. The campus newspaper, The Globe, is 
an independent, student-operated weekly published in print and online and is supervised by the Publications 
Board. WPPJ (AM and online), is a mixed-format radio station supervised by the Broadcast Media Board and 
provides the University community with music, news, and sports. U-View is the student-operated television 
station that produces a variety of programming and is supported by the School of Communication. Interested 
students are able to gain valuable skills and hands-on experience through the production and distribution of 
the content for these outlets including writing, editing, and advertising sales for The Globe; on-air and technical 
support services for WPPJ and U-View; web content editing for The Globe and WPPJ; and promotional event 
coordination  and  support  for  WPPJ.  For  more  information  on  the  University’s  media  outlets  and 
organizations, visit the website. 

Campus Activities Board 

The Campus Activities Board (CAB) is the official programming organization of the Office of Student 
Activities, Involvement, and Leadership (SAIL) at Point Park University. CAB provides the students of Point 
Park  with  quality  activities  that  promote  fun,  personal  development,  learning,  school  spirit  and  pride,  and 
foster an atmosphere conducive to social interaction among their peers. CAB gives students the opportunity 
to plan, market, and execute events for the university community and is open to all full-time undergraduate 
students at Point Park University.  Email cab@pointpark.edu for more details and how to join. 

Student Government Association 

The Student Government Association (SGA) is a student governance system whose purpose is to act as 
the recognized  communication  channel  between  the  students,  faculty,  and  administration  of  Point  Park 
University; advocate for and act as a protective body representing the students of Point Park University; allocate 
funds  to  student  organizations  and  clubs;  and  appoint  student  members  on  faculty  and  general  standing 
committees and ad hoc committees, as appropriate. SGA is composed of an executive branch and a legislative 
body. Governance is codified by a constitution and bylaws. Eligible students vote in elections for President, 
Vice President, and legislative positions, and may serve in appointed positions. For more information on SGA, 
visit the website. 

34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Code of Student Conduct 

The Code of Student Conduct can be found online in the annual  Student Handbook distributed by the 

Office of Student Affairs. 

STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES 
Alumni Engagement and Giving 

The Office of Alumni Engagement and Giving promotes alumni engagement with the University, through 
events,  programs,  volunteer  opportunities,  speaking  opportunities,  and  participation  in  philanthropic 
activities.  The  University  maintains  connections  with  the  over  26,000  thousand  graduates  of  Point  Park 
graduates who live in all fifty states and 33 countries and work in virtually every field and industry. 

Students have many opportunities to be engaged with Point Park alumni. Alumni come back to campus 
to share their expertise in the classroom, interact with students at events, and support other initiatives around 
campus.  Students interested in learning more can connect via social media or email alumni@pointpark.edu. 

The Bookstore 

The  Bookstore  carries  Point  Park  University  apparel  and  gift  items,  stationery  supplies,  leisure-reading 
books  and  magazines,  snacks,  and  other  miscellaneous  items.  The  Bookstore  also  carries  all  required  and 
recommended textbooks. Some titles are available as used textbooks. The Bookstore also offers several titles as 
a rentable option. In addition, the Bookstore buys back textbooks that have been adopted for use the next 
semester.  Note:  To  search  the  online  textbook  listings,  the  semester,  course  department  and  number,  and 
section number of each course are needed and can be found on the student’s class schedule. 

For more information about textbook pricing and book information, placing orders for the next semester, 

and Bookstore hours of operation, visit the Bookstore. 

Professional Career-Readiness Center 

Point Park University’s Professional Career-Readiness Center is an education and resource center that pro- 
vides programs and services to enhance student success by creating opportunities to achieve career-readiness, 
increase knowledge of career pathways, and connect to applied knowledge learning such as internships and co-
ops.  The  Center  also  assists  students  in  developing  professional  skills  and  connecting  to  meaningful 
employment  through strategic  partnerships  and targeted events.  Individuals who  utilize  our  programs and 
services learn to: 

•  Explore and understand career options, develop professional marketing materials, participate in the job 

• 

search process, and successfully complete interviews 
Interact with business leaders, community members, and employers through career-focused workshops, 
seminars, and other networking opportunities 

•  Establish professional career-readiness by developing and practicing competencies identified by the  

• 

National Association of Colleges and Employers 
Participate  in  applied  knowledge  learning  programs  such  as  internships  and  co-ops  to  gain  real-world, 
professional experience 

Career-Ready.  That’s  the  POINT. 

The Point Park University Professional Career-Readiness Center is always ready to help students — before 
and after graduation — with career mapping, job searches, professional documents, brand management, inter- 
viewing skills and much more! Schedule an appointment or learn more about our services at Pointpark.edu/ 
CareerReady. 

35 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University Advising Center 

The  University Advising  Center is dedicated to assisting  students in achieving  their  goals by providing 
clear academic guidance, connecting them to campus resources, and being a support up through graduation. 
The Center urges strong partnerships with faculty to create a positive Point Park experience for all students. 
While faculty serve as professional mentors, academic advisors monitor students’ academic path to graduation 
and all aspects of registration. 

Other ways the Center assists students: 

•  Transitioning to college life 
•  Registering and scheduling classes 
•  Learning to navigate PointWeb, the vital web portal for student information 
•  Determining an academic plan 
•  Utilizing accessibility services and resources 
•  Obtaining a tutor and writing support 
•  Completing student forms 
•  Discussing summer classes 
• 
Improving study skills 
• 
Finding a work-life balance 
•  Being a bridge to other departments, guidance, and support 

Each Point Park undergraduate student who has declared a major is assigned to a faculty member, within 
their field of study, who serves as a professional and scholarly mentor. Faculty mentors are the student's primary 
resource  for  discussing  current  trends  in  their  industry,  graduate  school  options,  internships  and  career 
opportunities, professional networking, and more. 

Academic Advisors assist students with various academic processes and monitor degree progress to ensure 
timely graduation. The University Advising Center also works closely with undecided students to help them 
explore majors that match their career and personal interests to find the best fit. The UAC is a hub where all 
undergraduate students are welcomed whether they have an appointment or are needing immediate assistance. 
The Center serves as a bridge to many other departments, guidance, and support. For more information visit 
The Center’s web pages. 

Tutoring, Writing, and Academic Coaching Services 

Phone .............................................................................................................................. 412-392-8132 
Email/General Inquiries .............................................................................. tutoring@pointpark.edu 
Location ................................................................................................ 5th Floor West Penn Building 
Website ..................................................................................................................... Tutoring Services 
Website ..................................................................................................................... Tutor Scheduling 

The Tutoring and Writing Centers provide professional and peer tutors for students who seek assistance 
in  their  coursework,  both  online  and  on-ground.  In  addition,  students  may  receive  guidance  with  effective 
study  strategies,  such  as  organization,  time  management,  note-taking  techniques,  and  exam  preparation. 
Students  make  appointments online through Point Park’s tutor scheduling software. This system will allow 
students to schedule one-on-one tutoring appointments and to upload writing assignments for review when a 
student doesn’t need to meet with a writing consultant. 

The Tutoring Center makes a reasonable effort to meet the tutoring needs of students in a wide variety of 
courses. However, we may not be able to honor every request due to limited tutor availability or inability to 
locate a qualified tutor. 

Tutoring  and  Writing  Centers 
Location – Tutoring Center ........................................................................ 517 West Penn Building 

36 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Location – Writing Center .......................................................................... 516 West Penn Building 
Location – Academic Coaching Center ...................................................... 520 West Penn Building 
Website ............................................................. Tutor & Writing Centers Appointment Scheduling 

Tutors at the Tutoring Center provide students with assistance in science, technology, engineering, and 

math  (STEM) courses as well as other subject areas. 

Consultants at the Writing Center provide support across the curriculum with writing assignments at any stage 
of the writing process.  Writing consultants can assist students with: 
•  Understanding the assignment handout, 
•  Getting started, brainstorming, and prewriting, 
•  Writing a thesis statement, 
•  Organization strategies, 
•  Grammar, usage, and style-skill development, 
• 
•  Correctly documenting sources, and 
•  Understanding and responding to instructor feedback. 

Proofreading strategies, 

Use  the  link  above  to  make  an  appointment  with  a  tutor  or  writing  consultant  or  submit  a  writing 

assignment for review when an appointment with a writing consultant is not needed. 

Commuter Resources 

The Office of Student Life serves as a resource to the commuter population of Point Park University living 
off  campus,  including  traditional-age  students,  non-traditional  or  adult  learners,  and  graduate  students. 
Essentially, any student not living in a Point Park residence hall is considered a commuter student. Visit the 
Commuter  Resources  web  pages  for  more  information  on  transportation  and  parking,  lockers,  dining  on 
campus  (including  meal plans for commuters), and  a renter’s guide. You will also find information on  the 
Commuter Lounge located on the 4th floor of Lawrence Hall, which has a TV, vending machines, microwave, copy 
machine, free Wi-Fi, and comfortable furniture for commuter students to hang out, relax, or study between 
classes. 

Computer and Technology Resources 

The use of University-owned computer and technology resources by Point Park students, employees, and 
guests is intended for purposes relating to the mission of the University and the academic purposes for which 
the  University  exists.  While  the  University  respects  the  individual’s  rights  and  protection  under  the  First 
Amendment, it expects all users of its resources to abide by good sense, University policy, and local, state, and 
federal laws. 

Under this policy, students have certain rights and responsibilities. Because the computer and technology- 
related resources at Point Park represent shared and finite resources, it is important for all users of such re- 
sources  to  remember  that  their  actions  can  impact  other’s  abilities  to  enjoy  their  rights.  Activities  that 
extraordinarily  impair  a  Point  Park  user’s  ability  to  utilize  the  resources  in  the  manner  for  which  they  are 
intended, or those that interfere with the operation of the University, will not be tolerated and appropriate 
action will be taken. 

Rights 
Assignment of Accounts 

All Point Park students are invited to utilize a level of technology resources appropriate to their needs. 
Currently enrolled students are entitled to internet access and an email account. Students are expected to use 
their University email address for all official and academic-related correspondence with instructors and other 
students.  This  is  the  only  email  address  that  is  acceptable  for  course-related  correspondence.  In  addition, 

37 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
students are expected to check their Point Park email address frequently for official University announcements 
and information, and as a result, will be held accountable for having received that information. 

Removal of Accounts 

Students who graduate or leave Point Park will have their accounts removed within thirty (30) days of their 
departure. It is the responsibility of the departing student to extract any files from his/her account prior to its 
removal. 

Use of Resources 

Any Point Park  student may use  the  computers in the open labs at no charge; however, users of these 
facilities  are  asked  to  limit  their  usage  to  academic  activities  only.  It  is  expected  that  users  of  Point  Park 
computer and technology resources will do so in a manner that supports Point Park-related activities. Non-
matriculated students and resident students who are under 18 will be required to have a parent’s or guardian’s 
permission to utilize the resources. 

Safety 

Users of Point Park computer and technology resources are entitled to use such facilities in a safe manner. 
The University will take all precautions to provide safe access but cannot guarantee a user’s safety. If a computer 
user  feels  as  though  s/he  is  in  danger  in  a  lab,  or  through  electronic  means  such  as  email  harassment  or 
electronic stalking, s/he should report such incidents to the University Police Department. 

Access to Information 

Point Park University will not censor access to information freely available on the internet. However, it is 
the  responsibility  of  the  computer  user  to  abide  by  all  federal,  state,  and  local  laws  regarding  access  to 
information, including text, pictures, audio and video recordings, and other electronic data. Certain Point Park 
policies will also apply to access to the institutional data and will be implemented in accordance with Family 
Education Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and its subsequent amendments. 

Freedom of Expression 

Point Park reserves the right to review a computer user’s individual home page for appropriate content. 
Content should reflect the mission, vision, and standards of the University. The information posted must not 
be represented as an official opinion or viewpoint of Point Park University. Computer users must abide by all 
federal, state, and local laws regarding posting of illegal or copyrighted information on their home pages or 
home directories. 

Privacy 

Computer  users  must  recognize  that  electronic  messages  and  files  are  neither  secure  nor  private 
communications. While Point Park will take reasonable measures to protect information that is transmitted 
electrically  it  cannot  guarantee  that  such  information  will  remain  private.  As  the  owner  of  all  University 
computer and technology resources, Point Park reserves its right to inspect, log, and/or archive data files stored 
on University owned computers and messages transmitted across its network. Such activities will not occur as a 
matter of course, may occur with cause if it is necessary to investigate a suspected breach of internal policy and 
external law. Authorized IT Center personnel may also inadvertently view or access data files or messages while 
performing  system  maintenance  or  management  functions  but  will  maintain  the  confidentiality  of  the 
information. Point Park University reserves the right to search data stored on its servers should it be suspected 
that a user is violating a policy or guideline. 

Official University Information 

Only those individuals who  have  been granted the  right  and responsibility to post information on the 

official Point Park website will be permitted to do so. 

Responsibilities 
Accounts 

38 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Each computer user is responsible for any activity that occurs from her/his account. Accounts are given to 
individuals, and are not permitted to be shared with friends, family members, classmates, co-workers, or any 
other individual or group. 

Disclosure of Information 

Unless permitted by law, or requested by law enforcement officials, no information pertaining to anyone 

affiliated with Point Park will be disclosed for any reason. 

Policy Violations 

Any  Point  Park  student  who  improperly  uses  technology-related  resources  is  subject  to  disciplinary 
measures, including, without limitation, revocation of network account. Activities deemed to be in violation 
of local, state, or federal laws will be reported to the appropriate authorities. 

Disciplinary processes already defined in the Undergraduate Catalog and Student Planner and Handbook 
will be followed where possible. Decisions pertaining to the revocation of a network account will be made based 
upon the severity of the infraction and the student’s need for this account to perform his/her job or course 
studies. 

International Student Services & Enrollment (ISSE) 

The mission of Point Park University’s Office of International Student Services and Enrollment is to assist 
in the immigration, education, and cultural aspects of study in the U.S. for international students and to pro- 
mote campus-wide international awareness by fostering an appreciation for diversity and by helping students 
understand their role and responsibilities as global citizens. 

ISSE offers specialized services to international students from enrollment through graduation from Point 
Park  University.  The  Office  serves  both  graduate  and  undergraduate  populations  starting  with  global 
recruitment  and  continuing  onward.  Continuing  programs  include  but  are  not  limited  to:  credential 
evaluation, international student orientation, health services and insurance procedures, tuition management, 
advising in all appropriate areas of post-secondary education, government regulation policies and procedures, 
along  with  social,  cultural,  and  educational  programs  to  enhance  the  university  experience  of  both  the 
international and domestic student population alike. For more information, ISSE may be reached by phone at 
412-392-4775, by email at iss@pointpark.edu, or visit the office in the 101 Wood Street Building. 

University Police Department 

The University Police are at work 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to provide a safe, secure living and learning 
environment for the University community. Police officers are on duty 365 days a year and provide immediate 
response to emergencies on campus. Procedures and additional responses to other emergencies are set forth in 
the Emergency Procedures section of the website and any questions can be addressed to the University Police. 
The department has received accreditation from the Pennsylvania Chiefs of Police Association. 

The Point Park University Annual Campus Crime and Security Report includes statistics for the previous 
three years on reported crimes that occurred on the campus; in certain off-campus buildings, or property owned 
by, or controlled by, the University; and on public property within, or immediately adjacent to, and accessible 
from, the campus. The report also includes institutional policies concerning campus security, such as policies 
concerning alcohol and drug use, crime prevention, the reporting of crimes, sexual assault, and other matters. 
A  copy  of  the  report  may  be  downloaded  as  a  pdf  from  the  University  website  or  obtain  a  print  copy  by 
contacting  the  University  Police,  Point  Park  University,  201  Wood  Street,  Pittsburgh,  PA  15222.  The 
University's  emergency response plan can be reviewed, and emergency-related questions can be addressed in 
person, located on the second floor of Frontier Hall. 

Student Health Center 

The  Student  Health  Center  provides  medical  care  to  all  currently  enrolled  students  at  no  charge  that 
includes  first  aid  intervention,  illness  and  injury  assessment,  starter  doses  of  over-the-counter  medication, 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
health screenings (i.e., blood pressure checks, height, and weight measurements), assistance with appointments, 
and community health referrals. In addition, the Student Health Center provides health education resource 
materials and is responsible for maintaining student health and immunization records. 

All residential students must have a completed Student Health Record on file in the Student Health Center 
that includes complete immunization documentation. Failure to submit proper immunization documentation 
may result in the student’s inability to register for classes and/or live in on-campus housing. 

The  staff of the Student Health Center is bound by the medical ethics of confidentiality.  Information 
provided will not be released to a third party, including parents, without the student’s written authorization, 
unless legally required or permitted. 

For more information, call or visit the Student Health Center located on the third floor of the Student 

Center, or visit the website. 

University Counseling Center 

The University Counseling Center (UCC), located on the third floor of the Student Center, addresses the 
mental health needs of the University community through a variety of services. We provide a safe, confidential 
environment for students to talk about personal or academic concerns, assist students who need to connect 
with mental health resources in the community, and support staff and faculty who have concerns about the 
well-being of a student. 

The UCC offers mental health services at no cost to all enrolled students, whether full- or part-time, com- 
muter or resident. Students come to the UCC for a variety of reasons. In some cases, students use therapy for 
self-exploration as a way to better understand themselves. Some students are looking for emotional or psycho 
logical support to learn how to deal with a psychological difficulty. Confidential services for students include 
consultation,  brief  individual  psychotherapy,  groups,  crisis  support,  and  referrals.  Our  staff  also  provides 
consultation and education for students, faculty, staff, and family members to address concerns regarding the 
well- being of a student and questions about our services or psychological treatment.  For more information, 
contact the office or consult the website. 

Spiritual Life 

The Point Park University community is inclusive of people from many different religious and spiritual 
traditions, as well as cultural, language, and racial backgrounds. We celebrate our rich diversity and recognize 
its value for our community's well-being and growth. We believe that all individuals are united in our search 
for meaning in life through spiritual well-being of our students, faculty and staff is essential to our core values: 
nurturing  students  in  their  academic  and  personal  growth,  facilitating  relationships  of  mutual  respect  and 
diversity,  and  fostering  community  engagement.  We  strive  to  foster  culturally  appropriate  support  for  our 
community members that is welcoming to all and encourages the expression of the full range of our collective 
spiritual practices. 

Interfaith Meditation Room 

Point  Park  has  an  interfaith  Meditation  Room that  is  available  24  hours  a  day  /  7  days  a  week  for 
individuals to pray or meditate. Please remove your shoes before entering in order to honor the sacredness of 
this interfaith prayer space for our whole community. 

Student Success Support 

At Point Park University, our priority is to help you reach your goals. We are here to support you, the 
student,  in  your  success  and  development  on  the  path  to  degree  completion,  personal  growth,  and  career 
readiness. While the number one person who can impact your success is YOU, we have many support services 
and resources available to help during your time at Point Park. 

The Director of Student Success in the University Advising Center coordinates and provides intervention 
and ongoing support for all students.  We strive to offer direction to those who have questions on their Pathways 

40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
to Success or course sequencing, as well as intervention for those who are experiencing academic difficulty, 
personal distress, or are otherwise at risk academically or financially. 

The FinishLine Early Alert System is a proactive communication and early intervention tool that allows 
University  faculty  and  staff  to  submit  information  that  may  impact  a  student’s  progress,  persistence,  and 
success. Information submitted via early alerts allow academic advisors and other areas on campus to reach out, 
offer support, and intervene with students in a timely fashion. 

The objective of this program is to promote student success by: 
• 
Providing students with timely support and referrals to appropriate campus services or resources. 
•  Actively engaging students in their learning experience and decision-making on their degree pathway. 
•  Helping students learn useful self-advocacy skills and how to navigate the resources available to them. 
•  Creating more purposeful communication and documentation among faculty, advisors, and support staff. 

Examples of student concerns or issues include unsatisfactory academic progress (scoring poorly on tests 
or quizzes, poor quality or missing assignments, low mid-term progress reports, or insufficient completion of 
degree credit requirements) and/or exhibiting behaviors that may lead to academic difficulty (non-attendance, 
habitually dropping a course, or engaging in disruptive or otherwise troubling behavior). 

If you would like assistance but do not know where to turn or have questions regarding the FinishLine Early 
Alert System, contact retention@pointpark.edu. Information submitted through alerts and interventions is a part of 
each student's academic record, as defined by FERPA, and is confidentially maintained by the Office of Academic Affairs. 

Important Notice to Students: Your success is directly tied to your effort, your level of engagement, and your 
ability to effectively communicate. Please check your Point Park University email on a regular basis, at least 
once  a  day.  This  communication  method  is  the  primary  form  of  communication  between  you  and  the 
University. Important timelines and directions from faculty or University offices, campus announcements, event 
publicity, and outreach regarding academic, personal, or financial concerns will all be communicated primarily 
via your Point Park University email address. Other communications may include Canvas messaging, phone 
calls,  or  U.S.  Mail.  For  assistance  in  setting  up  your  Point  Park  email  on  your  mobile  device(s),  visit  the 
Technology Help Desk located at 220 Thayer Hall, or call 412-392-3494. To update contact information with 
the University, visit the Office of the University Registrar on the 1st floor of Thayer Hall, or visit the website. 

41 

 
 
 
 
ACADEMIC POLICIES 
Graduation Requirements for Baccalaureate and Associate Degrees 

Once a student is admitted to Point Park University, that student will need to understand and follow all 
academic policies and procedures to successfully complete a course of study. University officials such as faculty 
advisor and department chair can aid, but it is ultimately the student’s responsibility to be aware of policies 
relating to grading, academic process, withdrawal from courses, declaring or changing majors, and requirements 
for graduation. This chapter explains the general academic policies. The chapter, Academic Programs, discusses 
the degree programs, majors, and general education requirements. 

Point Park University awards undergraduate and graduate degrees to students through its School of Arts 
and Sciences; Rowland School of Business; School of Dance; School of Theatre, Film, and Animation; School 
of  Education;  and  School  of  Communication.  Students  must  meet  the  minimum  requirements  for  their 
particular degrees and programs of study as stated in this catalog. 

The minimum cumulative and major grade point averages (G.P.A.) are set by the respective departments 
and may exceed that set by the University. All baccalaureate degrees require a minimum of 120 credit hours. 
The minimum cumulative and major grade point averages set by the University are 2.00. 

Education students should consult with the School of Education for current information regarding the 

minimum standards required for certification. 

Residency Requirements:  

All  candidates  for  the  baccalaureate  degree  must  satisfy  the  "30  hours  rule",  this  means  that  they 
must earn at least 30 hours at Point Park University, and they must also complete at least 24 of their final 30 
credit hours in residence. They must also successfully complete no fewer than 12 hours (in four courses of at 
least three or more credit hours) in their major(s).   

An  individual  can  earn  a  second  baccalaureate  degree  upon  earning  a  minimum  of  150  credits  and 
the completion of all major requirements for two programs of study. This can be achieved in one of three ways:  
o  by completing the two programs at Point Park University simultaneously  
o 

after having been awarded a baccalaureate at Point Park University by completing a second program of 
study and additional credits to total at least 150 credit hours earned at Point Park University  
after having been awarded a baccalaureate degree at another accredited college or university by completing 
a second program of study and at least 30 additional credit hours at Point Park University  

o 

If  a  particular  course  is  required  in  both  degree  programs,  it  cannot  be  credited  as  part  of  the  30-

semester hour requirement for completion of the second degree.  

Students pursuing the post-baccalaureate degree must meet the same residency and major(s) requirements 

as listed for the candidates for the baccalaureate degree.  

Students  must  apply  for  graduation  and  degree  conferral  through  the  Office  of  the  University 
Registrar. The  University  confers  degrees  completed  during  the  academic  year  in  December,  May,  and 
August. The University  holds  a  formal  commencement  ceremony  in  April/May. All  students  who  are 
completing degrees by the end of summer are invited to participate in commencement, although degrees are 
not conferred until all degree requirements have been met.  

Major Status 

The University does not require entering first-year students to identify a preferred course of study at the 
time of registration, but students may declare a major upon admission and should do so by the end of the 
sophomore year. 

During  registration,  academic  advisors  will  guide  entering  students  toward  the  core  curriculum  and 
appropriate  major  courses  or  requirements.  Such  guidance  should  ensure  that  students  acquire  certain 
fundamental skills while completing prerequisites for study in the major. 

Each school assigns an academic advisor to all new majors. Academic advisors provide advice and guidance 
on such matters as concentrations, minors, certifications, change of major, career goals, and job preparation. 
A major may be declared or changed at any time with a form signed by the chair of the intended major. 

42 

 
 
 
 
Department chairs may place on probation or exclude from majoring students who cannot meet or exceed 

a G.P.A. of 2.00 for all departmental requirements. 

Some students elect to pursue double majors. They may obtain the appropriate forms from the Registrar 
or school offices and should submit them as soon as possible after the completion of the first year and no later 
than the end of the sophomore year. Students pursuing a double major must meet the complete requirements 
for both degrees prior to degree conferral. Only one diploma will be issued acknowledging both majors. A list 
of majors can be found under Academic Programs in this catalog or Here. 

The Minor 

Minors  can  be  used  to  enrich  major  fields  of  study,  enhance  learning,  and  improve  credentials  for 
employment.  Those  electing  to  pursue  minors  must  coordinate  this  decision  with  their  academic  advisor. 
Declaration of a minor is a formal process and requires the filing of a form with the Registrar by the end of the 
sophomore year. 

In most departments, requirements for the minor include 18 credits. No more than nine transfer credits 
may be applied toward the minor. Courses for the minor may not be taken under the Pass-No Credit or Audit 
option. 

Conservatory of Performing Arts 
Choreography  
Cinema Studies 
 Dance 
Musical Theatre Minor for Dancers 
Musical Theatre Minor for Theatre Arts Majors  
 Screenwriting 
Stage Management  
Technical Theatre/Design 
Theatrical Engineering 

School of Arts and Sciences 
Criminal Justice & Intelligence Studies 
Criminal Justice 
Forensic Science 
Intelligence and National Security 

Literature, Culture, and Society 
Creative Writing  
English 
History 
International and Environmental Studies 
Legal Studies 
Philosophy  
Political Science 
Social Justice Studies 
Sociology 

Psychology  
Behavioral Science  
Psychology 

Natural Science & Engineering  
Biological Sciences 
 Chemistry  
Mathematics 
Mechanical Engineering - Solid Mechanics 
Mechanical Engineering - ThermoFluid 
Theatrical Engineering 

Rowland School of Business 
Accounting 
Applied Computer Science  
Business Management  
Digital Marketing  
Economics 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS)   
Entrepreneurship 
Finance 
Fire Service Administration 
Hospitality Management  
Human Resources Management 
 Marketing 
Nonprofit Management  
Professional Sales  
Public Administration  
Sports, Arts, Entertainment and Music Business 

Community Engagement 

Community Engagement and Social Change 
Women and Gender Studies 

43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School of Communication 
Broadcast Production     
Broadcast Reporting 
Culture & Entertainment Journalism  
Digital Journalism  
Graphic Design 
Mass Communication             
Multimedia 
Painting & Drawing 
Photography 
Photojournalism 
Public Relations, Advertising and Social Media 

School of Education 
Education 
Middle School English 
Middle School Mathematics 
Middle School Science 
Middle School Social Studies  
Special Education

44 

 
                                                                  
Degree Requirements 

Students are provided degree requirements outlining the requirements for graduation. Students pursue 
the  major  of  their  choice  under  the  provisions  of  the  degree  requirements  in  effect  at  the  time  of  their 
matriculation. Each  program  guide  is  specific to  the  student’s  major.  It is imperative  that  students take  all 
courses on their program guides. Failure to do so can delay graduation. Degree requirements are available via 
the website, PointWeb, or from the department of their major. 

Students  who  change  their  major  will  pursue  their  new  major  under  the  provisions  of  the  degree 
requirements in effect during the academic year in which the change in major occurs. Likewise, students who 
declare a second major pursue the second major under the provisions of the degree requirements in effect for 
the academic year in which the second declaration occurs. 

DOUBLE MAJOR 

A student may elect to pursue a double major, which is earned when both attempted majors will result in 

the same degree type (B.A., B.S., B.F.A., etc.). Students pursuing a double major must select a primary major 
and must meet all requirements for both majors prior to degree conferral. While some courses can be shared 
between majors, such as those in the University Core Curriculum, there must be a minimum of 30 unique 
credits between the two majors. Point Park University students who complete a double major will receive one 
diploma with both majors printed on it. Official transcripts will also reflect both majors. 

DUAL DEGREE 

A student may also elect to pursue a dual degree, which is earned when both attempted majors will result 
in two different degree types (B.A. and B.F.A., or B.S. and B.A., for example). Students pursuing a dual degree 
must meet all requirements for both degrees prior to degree conferral. While courses can be shared between 
degrees, a minimum of 150 credits are required to complete a dual degree. Point Park University students who 
earn a dual degree will receive two diplomas. Both degrees and majors will be printed on the official university 
transcript.  

Students  who  wish  to  pursue  either  a  double  major  or  dual  degree  should  complete  and  submit  the 
“Double Major Declaration” form to the Office of the  Registrar as soon as possible, as a delay in declaring 
either  can  hinder  timely  completion  of  degree  requirements.  The  declaration  form  can  be  found  on  the 
Registrar’s page of the Point Park University website. 

Academic Advisement 

Each student has an academic advisor who is a faculty member in the department of the major area of 
study. Students must meet regularly with their advisors to prepare their academic programs and to discuss their 
academic progress. Changes of advisor occur at the discretion of the department chair. The University Advising 
Center is also available to meet with undergraduate students regarding their programs. 

Students are responsible for familiarizing themselves with the requirements of their major programs, se- 
curing degree requirements, and selecting their courses accordingly. Students, not advisors, must complete and 
forward Registration and/or Schedule Change Request forms to the Office of the University Registrar. 

Academic Progress 

The University awards credits for courses completed at Point Park with a letter grade of “D” or higher or 

Pass/No Credit courses with a “P.” The course description specifies the number of credits for each course. 

Part-time students take eleven or fewer credits a term; full-time students take twelve to eighteen. Students 
expecting to earn a bachelor’s degree in the traditional span of four years should take fifteen to eighteen credits 
a semester. 
Enrollment Status is determined by the following: 
•  1 - 5 semester hours is less than half time 
•  6 - 8 semester hours is half-time 
•  9 - 11 semester hours is three quarter time 
•  12 - 18 semester hours is full-time 

45 

 
 
 
 
 
 
•  19 semester hours or more constitutes an overload; it requires special permission, and students are 

charged additional per credit hour tuition. 

Academic advisors must sign off on all overloads of 19-21 credits. The appropriate academic dean must 

sign off on all overloads of 22 credits or above. 

Class standing is a function of credits earned: 

Freshman: 0-29  

Sophomore: 30-59   

Junior: 60-89   

Senior: 90+ 

Grades and Grade Point Average 

Faculty have primary responsibility for assigning grades, but they do not give them; rather, students must 
earn them. Grades represent a faculty member’s impartial, professional evaluation of a student’s work on a 
given assignment or in each course. 

At  the  outset  of  any  course,  the  students  taking  it  should  receive  a  course  syllabus  including  a  clear 
statement of the course requirements and grading standards. Students who do not receive such a document 
should  promptly ask their faculty member to provide it. In the unlikely event the faculty member does not 
comply,  the requesting  student  has  the  responsibility  to  request  the  information  from  the  appropriate 
department chair. 

The department chair has the responsibility to assist the requesting student to obtain, in writing, a clear 

statement of the course requirements and grading standards. 

Incomplete Grade Requests 
        A grade of Incomplete (I) is issued only when a student, due to extenuating circumstances, is unable to 
complete their work for the semester.  Poor attendance, late assignments, and below average performance are 
not extenuating circumstances. At least 60% of the required work must be completed before a faculty 
member is able to grant an incomplete.  
         Students in traditional 15-week courses have 1 semester from the last day of classes in which the 
incomplete was assigned to complete their work.  Students in 8-week courses have 5 weeks from the last day 
of classes in which the incomplete was assigned to complete their work. If the agreed-upon work is not 
completed by the deadline, the “I” converts to an “F” or grade designated by the instructor. Attending a 
future section of the course without registering or registering as an audit is not an option for completing an 
incomplete.  
          An incomplete request, including an account of the work to be completed, and the deadline, if shorter 
than the stated policy, must be submitted to the Office of the University Registrar by the instructor on or 
before the grade entry deadline.  
          Once the student has completed the work, the instructor must submit a Change of Grade form to the 
Office of the University Registrar.   
           Incomplete grades are not used to calculate academic standing.  
           All incompletes must be completed before degree conferral.  

Pass/No Credit Option 

The grade “P” (Passing) indicates that credits are earned, and quality points are not computed. The grade 
“N” (No Credit) in a course taken under the Pass-No Credit option indicates that no credits are earned, and 
quality points are not computed. 

To encourage exploration and experimentation in academic areas in which a student may have limited 
familiarity, courses may be taken on a Pass/No Credit basis under the following conditions: “P” will be recorded 
for “A”, “B”, “C,” and “D” grades and “N” will be recorded for an “F” grade. Neither the “P” nor the “N” will 
affect the G.P.A. Only general college electives may be taken on the Pass/No Credit option. Baccalaureate degree 
candidates may choose a maximum of eight Pass/No Credit courses, and associate degree candidates are limited 
to four such courses. Only one course during any term may be so elected. Courses taken under  the Pass/No 
Credit option must be designated as such before the end of the Schedule Change period for each semester or 

46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
summer session. In some instances, a course may be announced as one in which “P” and “N” will be the only 
grades. For example, departments may offer non-traditional courses that include travel, a practicum, field work 
or other components that may be difficult or impossible to evaluate through testing or other traditional means. 
In any semester, a student may change his or her status to Pass/No Credit option until the end of the 
schedule change  period, but a student may not change  from a P/N to credit enrollment after the schedule 
change period. 

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the disruption it caused for students at Point Park University, 
students were able to choose a P or N grade after their grades were posted. Students receiving a D or higher 
were given a P. Students that failed a course were allowed to choose an N instead. This option was available for 
students after the Spring 2020, Fall, 2020 and Spring 2021 semesters only. 

Auditing a Course 

The grade “AU” (Audit) indicates that no credits have been given in a course. In any semester, a student 
may change his or her status to audit until the end of the add-drop period, but a student may not change from 
audit status to credit enrollment. 

Grades 

All  grade  changes  must  be  processed  within  one  calendar  year.  Changes  of  the  recorded  grade  will  be 
considered under exceptional circumstances upon the recommendation of the faculty member, the approval 
of the department chair, and the Registrar. Changes of the recorded grade resulting from a student grievance 
must follow the established grievance procedure contained in this catalog. 

Undergraduate student academic performance is measured by computation of the Grade Point Average 

(G.P.A.). In this system letter grades are given the following numerical (grade point) values: 

A = 4.0 
A- = 3.75 

B+ = 3.25 
B = 3.0 

B- = 2.75 
C+ = 2.25 

C = 2.0 
C- = 1.75 

D = 1.0 
F = 0.0 

The G.P.A. is determined by multiplying the numerical (grade point) value earned in each course by the 
number of credits assigned to that course, summing the total Grade Points, and dividing by the total number 
of credits attempted. 

The effect of an “F” grade on the G.P.A. can be removed only by successful repetition of the course at 
Point Park  University. Should a student repeat a course that is not specifically designated as repeatable for 
credit, only the last attempt for the course will be used in computing the grade point average (unless the grade 
for the last attempt is a W, in which case the previous attempt will be used to determine credit and grade point 
average). Each attempt to complete the course and grade earned will be listed on the student’s transcript as the 
official record of the student’s academic progress. 

Students may not repeat a failed course at another institution for credit or receive  CLEP or DANTES 

credit for that course. 

Grade Appeals 

The parties recognize that faculty members are primarily responsible for assessing student performance, 
including the assignment of course grades, with respect to academic activities for which faculty members are 
individually responsible to teach. All course grades shall be based upon an impartial, professional evaluation 
of the students' academic performances in the course. The parties further recognize that the University allows 
any student to appeal the legitimacy of any course grade issued to the student in accordance with University 
policies and procedures, which  may  include  a  hearing before  one  or  more faculty  members.  In  the event a 
student appeals a course grade, the faculty member who issued the grade shall be responsible for providing the 
student with a full explanation for the basis of the grade. 

A student grade appeal begins with an informal discussion between the student and the faculty member 
who assigned the grade at issue. If the grade appeal is not resolved through the informal discussion, the student 

47 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
may further pursue the issue through a written appeal to and discussion with the Department Chair. Appeals 
to  the  Department  Chair  must  occur  within  four  (4)  weeks  after  the  start  of  the  semester  (fall/spring) 
immediately following the semester in which the grade was issued. If the grade appeal is not resolved through 
discussion between the student and the Department Chair and the student wishes to further pursue the grade 
appeal, the Department Chair shall convene a committee consisting of three (3) faculty members, at least one (I) 
of  whom  shall  have  familiarity  with  the  subject  matter  of  the  course  resulting  in  the  disputed  grade.  The 
committee shall consider the grade appeal in accordance with procedures established by the University, which 
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Article and make a recommendation regarding the grade 
appeal to the Dean. The Dean shall make the final decision regarding all grade appeals. 

In all student grade  appeal matters, the student bears responsibility for establishing  whether  any grade 

issued by the faculty member should be modified. 

Student Complaints 

Point Park University is committed to providing our students with quality academic, co-curricular 

and support services that combine to provide an outstanding learning environment. In addition, the 
University is committed to treating all students fairly and respectfully. To that end, we provide students with 
an avenue to assist the University in identifying serious or systemic concerns, problems or issues affecting the 
quality of University life. Information     regarding the student complaint process may be found at Student 
Complaint | Point Park University | Pittsburgh, PA.  

Non-Transcripted Audit 

Point  Park  University  educates  students  in  a  diverse  environment  and  prepares  graduates  to  apply 

knowledge to achieve their goals, advance their professions and serve their communities. 

Objectives: 
1.  To encourage continuing education to Point Park University alumni and community members. 
2.  To provide for current Point Park Students to explore other academic areas and/or brush-up on subjects. 

Please Note: 

•  Except  for  CINE  302,  Cinema  Authors,  under  no  circumstances  may  any  course  beginning  with  the 

prefix CINE be taken as a non-transcripted audit. 

•  Under no circumstances may any course beginning with the prefix DANC be taken as a non-transcripted 

audit. 

•  Any course beginning with THEA may be audited with the approval of the Instructor, Unit Head, and the 

Chair. 

•  Under no circumstances may any Conservatory private instruction course be taken as a non-transcripted 

audit including, but not limited to: Private Voice, Private Piano, and/or Private Pilates. 

Guidelines: 

•  Any current Point Park University student, Point Park University alumnus, or community member may 
sit in on one course per semester if the faculty member has agreed to the audit, the individual meets the 
required prerequisites, and there is a seat available. 

•  There will be a fee per course. 
•  No credit will be granted, and there will be no transcript kept of this activity. 
•  There is no refund of the fee. 
•  The individual will be required to be prepared for the class to add to the discussion. 
•  No tests, papers, projects, etc. will be required. 
•  There will be a maximum of three non-students permitted in any one course. 
•  The status may change from a non-credit audit  to a regular student at any time during the Schedule Change 

period by gaining acceptance to Point Park University, enrolling, and paying full tuition and fees. 

•  A Non-Transcripted Student Audit identification card will be issued. This permits the individual access to 

48 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the classroom building and provides the privilege of attending the agreed upon course. No other privileges 
are granted, including, but not limited to library use, Point Park University events, and discount tickets. 

Procedures: 

•  An interested person should contact the Office of the University Registrar to be placed on a waiting list. 
for  a  particular  course.  The  Office  of  the  University  Registrar  will  check  with  the  faculty  member for 
permission to audit. 

•  The individual will be notified the day before classes begin whether or not a seat is available. 
•  The individual will go to the Office of Admissions to process their audit request, pay the business office 

the fee, and begin attending the class. 

Academic Integrity and Academic Dishonesty 

Point Park expects all members of the community to demonstrate the highest levels of integrity and ethics in 
their academic work. To facilitate this, the faculty have adopted the following guidance on Academic 
Integrity. By aligning their conduct to these guidelines, all members of the community can protect their own 
work and represent the values upheld at Point Park University. Departments or Programs, working in 
collaboration with the Academic Integrity Working Group, may develop additional expectations, which 
should be communicated to students in writing at least once per semester. 

•  Credit: Acknowledge the sources of words, ideas, performances, compositions, or images that are 

borrowed, including those that are quoted, paraphrased, or used as inspiration. Take ownership and 
responsibility for your words and ideas in matters of public discourse (i.e. conversations, social 
media, classroom discussion) and give credit where credit is due, as you would hope others do when 
engaging with any work you have created.  

•  Timeliness: Represent your own best thinking and understanding in the moment. Engage with 
other thinkers with the expectation that they, too, are representing their best thinking and 
reasoning on a subject at a given moment. It’s common for beliefs, knowledge, and thinking to 
change over time, so don’t recycle old work or imagine that what was once true will be true for all 
time.  

•  Active, Consensual Conversation: Use citation and reference to demonstrate how your work is in 

conversation with others’ work, both in the present and throughout the arc of history. Recording or 
submitting a conversation to public review or scrutiny, including submitting it to AI (Artificial 
Intelligence) engines, should only be done with all participants’ permission.  

•  Ethical Alignment: Adhere to ethical practices within educational and professional communities. 
This includes following standard research, citation, and discovery practices in your discipline and, 
for some kinds of research, obtaining permission from the Institutional Review Board. Do not 
disclose personally identifiable information about yourself or anyone else without confirming the 
recipient will handle the information with appropriate care.  

•  Accuracy: Strive for accuracy in your work. Some inaccuracies are simple errors of transcription, 

calculation, or other elements of the research process, but misrepresentation of facts and distortions 
of data are unacceptable.  

•  Traceability: Take care to document your process and sources as you work and rely on both 

conventional methods of documentation and information literacy strategies to ensure that you 
know the origins of your sources. Generating content without a traceable record of the work process 
can undermine the viability of your work.  

Academic Dishonesty  
When members of the community do not achieve the minimum standards outlined by this guidance, the 
University will pursue a dual response that safeguards individual and institutional integrity.  

49 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
Individual Integrity: Faculty are responsible for assigning grades. Grades are not, however, rewards or 
penalties. Rather, they represent a faculty member’s evaluation of a student’s ability to master specific course 
concepts or content. To maintain the individual integrity of every grade assigned, faculty should consider 
whether instances of academic dishonesty might represent opportunities for further teaching or learning. 
They should also assign a grade that evaluates a student’s demonstration of learning. Faculty play a pivotal 
role in ensuring institutional integrity and, for this reason, they are expected to report instances of academic 
dishonesty to the Registrar’s Office.   

Institutional Integrity: The Academic Integrity Working Group will have primary responsibility for reviewing 
reports of academic dishonesty at the institutional level. They will convene periodically, upon the 
recommendation of the Registrar. Their primary work will be to seek out patterns within the reported data 
and recommend an appropriate institutional response. This may include the investigation of reported 
instances of academic dishonesty and the recommendation of specific levels of response. For a given reported 
instance of academic dishonesty, the Academic Integrity Working Group might recommend Clearing, 
Warning, Probation, Suspension, or Dismissal, depending on the findings and the severity of the report. For 
institutional units with unusual patterns of academic dishonesty, the AIWG might recommend intervention 
at the course, department, school, or institutional level, depending on the findings.   

Institutional Review Board 

Research  protocols  involving  human  participants  must  be  approved  by  the  Point  Park  University 
Institutional Review Board. The Institutional Review Board, made up of faculty and administration is chaired 
by  a  tenured,  full-time  faculty  member  who  reports  to  the  Provost,  reviews  all  research  protocols  involving 
human participants to determine if the research participants are placed at risk and if their rights and welfare 
are  adequately protected. Guidelines and required forms for research protocols are available at  Institutional 
Review Board. 

Academic Standing 

Academic standing is separate from financial aid standing and satisfactory academic progress (SAP). Please 
see Satisfactory Academic Progress for Financial Aid Eligibility (page 31) for more information regarding SAP 
progress. 

Students'  academic  standing  is  determined  by  their  cumulative  grade  point  averages  (GPA).  Academic 
Standing is normally calculated for fall and spring semesters. Academic Suspension, Academic Dismissal, and 
Immediate Reinstatement will be permanently recorded on students' official transcripts. An Academic Warning 
will not appear on the official transcript. However, all Academic Warnings, Academic Probations, as well as all 
Academic Suspensions, Academic Dismissals, and Immediate Reinstatements will be permanently recorded on 
internal academic records. 

Good Standing 

Students are in good academic standing when their cumulative GPA is 2.00 or above. This requirement 
applies  to  full-time  and  part-time  students  and  to  those  who  were  admitted  as  first-year,  transfer,  or  non-
matriculated students. The average number of credits earned per semester is not used in the determination of 
academic standing. However, the Registrar's Office will issue a credit alert to all students who have earned less 
than an average of 12 graduation credits per semester. 

Academic Warning 

Academic  Warning  is  an  indicator  to  students  that  they  are  in  academic  difficulty.  Students  whose 
cumulative GPA is 2.00 or above, but whose Semester GPA falls below 2.00, will be sent a warning. This status 
does not appear on the transcript and is not subject to appeal. 

Academic Probation 

Academic Probation is a formal standing that shows the student is in academic distress. Students whose 
cumulative GPA falls below 2.00 will be placed on Academic Probation. This standing appears on the transcript 

50 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
and is not subject to appeal. First-year and Sophomore students on Academic Probation will be required to 
collaborate with an academic coach.  

Academic Suspension 

Academic Suspension is a separation from the University of a full semester (fall or spring). Students who 
have  been  on  Academic  Probation  and  who  fail  to  achieve  or  maintain  Good  Standing  in  any  subsequent 
semester will be placed on Academic Suspension. Suspended students may not enroll in the succeeding fall or 
spring  semester  (see  section  on  Appeals  Process  below).  Following  one  semester  on  Academic  Suspension, 
students who submit a Request for Reactivation (see Reactivation Procedure section) that is approved by the 
University  Registrar  before  February  15  for  the  Fall  semester  or  September  15  for  the  Spring  semester  are 
entitled to  participate in Priority Registration. Upon reactivation, students returning  from suspension shall 
confer with their student success coordinator prior to re-enrollment. This standing appears on the transcript 
and is eligible for appeal. 

Students who are placed on Academic Suspension may be granted an Immediate Reinstatement through 
the appeal process (see Appeals Process below). Immediate Reinstatement status allows the student to return 
on Academic Probation and grants the student an additional semester to achieve Good Standing. Students on 
Immediate Reinstatement status who fail to achieve Good Standing will be dismissed. 

Academic Dismissal 

Academic Dismissal is a permanent separation from the University. Students who were previously placed 
on  Academic  Suspension  (including  those  granted  an  appeal  and  Immediate  Reinstatement)  who  are 
readmitted  and  fail  to  achieve  or  maintain  Good  Standing  in  any  subsequent  semester  will  be  placed  on 
Academic  Dismissal  unless  an  appeal  is  granted  (see  Appeals  Process  below).  This  standing  appears  on  the 
transcript and is eligible for appeal. 

Summer Course Enrollments for Suspended and Dismissed Students 

Students who have been suspended or dismissed from the institution cannot register for Summer Session 
courses. If a student appeals a suspension or dismissal and the appeal is granted, the student may sign up for 
classes prior to the start of the semester and within the add drop period. 

Appeals Process 

Students have the right to appeal Academic Suspension or Academic Dismissal. Authority for determining 

students' academic status resides with the school dean. 

1.  Students  must  consult  with  the  registrar’s  office  about  the  petitions  and  appeals  procedures. 
Students may also consult with their  University Advising  Center advisor. All appeals must be 
submitted in writing on the Academic Appeal Form to the University Registrar by the deadline 
stated in the notice of Academic Suspension or Academic Dismissal. 

2.  Appeals of Academic Suspension or Academic Dismissal may be made on the following grounds: 
substantial  academic  progress;  course  work  completed  after  the  initial  decision;  financial 
difficulties; health problems; extenuating personal circumstances; other academic reasons. 

The decision of the academic dean is final. 

Academic Status and Grade Changes 

The academic status earned by a student shall remain in effect if they receive a retroactive grade change 
that affects  Academic Standing, unless the  original grade  is corrected by the professor, or an  Incomplete is 
converted to a grade, within 6 weeks. 

Course Additions and Withdrawals 

The schedule for course changes, including withdrawal, is listed on the University web site, and published 

51 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by the Office of the University Registrar. Courses may be added or dropped from a student’s academic schedule 
online within the add/drop period or by completing a Schedule Change form. 

After the period specified, the faculty member has the option to give a grade of “W” or “F,” up to and 
including the last day to withdraw. No withdrawals will be granted beyond the final day to withdraw. Schedule 
Change forms may be obtained from the Office of the University Registrar. Should a “W” or “F” be placed on 
a student’s record, it remains a permanent part of that record. 

International students must contact the University’s International Student Office before initiating a course 

withdrawal. 

Because  current  and  future  financial  aid  may  be  jeopardized  by  processing  a  “W”  or “F,”  students  are 
advised to consult the Office of Financial Aid prior to completing the transaction and get permission from the 
Office of Student Accounts. 

On-ground students wishing to take an 8-week online course must meet the following criteria: 
• 
• 
• 

Student should be at junior level standing or higher. 
Student should have a minimum GA of 2.5. 
Student may take 1 online course per 8-week term with a maximum of 3 8-week online course for the fall 
and spring semester. 
If a student has failed a 15-week course, the student will not be able to retake the course in an 8- week 
term during a fall or spring semester. 
Student will work with his or her advisor in the University Advising Center to ensure appropriate course 
and modality selection. 

• 

• 

•  Course requests will come from the UAC advisor and are subject to approval by the student’s 

department and by the Online Division. Some requests may not be approved and/or have to wait until a 
week prior to the start of the term to ensure availability for the online program students. 

Complete Withdrawal 

Students  wishing  to  withdraw  from  the  University  before  or  after  the  beginning  of  a  term  must  use  a 
Complete Withdrawal Form to drop or withdraw all classes and deliver the completed form to the Office of 
the University Registrar. To obtain a Complete Withdrawal form, visit the  University Advising Center. The 
date  the  Office  of  the  University  Registrar  processes  the  completed  form  is  the  effective  date  of  complete 
withdrawal. 

To complete the form, you will need the following signatures, or the form will not be processed: 
•  University Advising Center 
• 
• 
•  Registrar’s Office Signature 

Student Financial Services Center 
ISD Signature (applicable only for International Students) 

All recipients of federal financial aid need to be aware that their financial aid package will be adjusted 
under the Return of Title IV funds policy if the student withdraws from all of his/her classes.  Go to the Return 
of Title IV Funds policy for more information. 

Medical Exception Request 

Students who experience a medical issue during an academic term of such a severity that they are unable 
to continue  or  keep  up  with  their  courses  may  consider  requesting  a  Medical  Exception  for  the  academic 
term.  A  Medical  Exception  can  impact  a  student’s  academic  career  in  several  ways,  and  students  are 
encouraged to consider alternatives before applying for a Medical Exception. Students are strongly encouraged 
to meet with the University Advising Center  to  discuss  alternatives  to  the  Medical  Exception  process, 
which  may  include requesting incomplete grades. 

Students  with  a  medical  condition  involving  a  short-term  or  long-term  disability  should  also  consider 
meeting  with  the  Office  of  Accessibility  Services .  Call  the  office  at  412-392-8077  or  email 
accessibility@pointpark.edu. 

52 

 
 
 
 
 
 
International students should meet with the International Student Services and Enrollment (ISSE) staff 
to discuss  how  a  Medical  Exception  will  affect  their  visa  status.  Call  the  office  at  412-392-4775 or email 
iss@pointpark.edu. 

Except for short-term temporary issues, students must be actively attending classes to be permitted to live 
in the University residences. A student applying for a Medical Exception will be required to move out of the 
residence halls. Housing and meal plan charges may be able to be prorated based upon the date the student 
vacates the residence hall or last uses the meal plan, whichever date is later. For information on terminating a 
resident  contract  and  moving  out,  contact  the  Office  of  Student  Life  by  phone  at  412-392-8026,  email  at 
studentlife@pointpark.edu or visit the office on the seventh floor of the Student Center. 

Medical Exception Request Process 

A Medical Exception will be granted for a full academic term only; requests for a partial term or part of a 
student’s course load will not be granted; thus, in order to request a Medical Exception, the student will be 
required to withdraw from all classes for the applicable academic term.  Only one Medical Exception for a total 
of one academic term will be granted per student. 

Students must request a Medical Exception Request packet from the Office of Student Affairs. The request 
may be made in person by visiting the office on the seventh floor of the Student Center or by phone at 412-
392-3840 or email at studentaffairs@pointpark.edu. The packet will include all forms and instructions needed 
to submit the documents required to request a Medical Exception. As the policy, forms, and instructions, may 
change from time to time, the student must follow all instructions and submit all forms as directed at the time 
he/she receives the Medical Exception Request packet. 

Deadline to Submit Medical Exception Request 

All documents related to a Medical Exception Request must be received in the Office of Student Affairs 
no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the end of the academic term for which the Medical Exception is 
requested. 

It is strongly recommended that students keep copies of all Medical Exception Request documents and 

proof of submission.  The Office of Student Affairs will confirm the receipt of documents upon request. 

Confidentiality of Medical Records 

The Office of Student Affairs understands and takes seriously the confidentiality of the student’s medical 
information provided during the Medical Exception process.  This information is shared only with a) University 
staff needed to consult with regarding the merits of the request, such as the University Nurse or University 
Counselor, or b) person(s) permitted per the Authorization to Release Information Form if submitted by the 
student. All Medical Exception Request Forms and supporting documentation will be housed solely within the 
Office of Student Affairs. University offices such as the Offices of the University Registrar, Student Accounts 
and Financial Aid will be notified of the decision to grant or deny a Medical Exception Request, but not the 
details of the request. 

Medical Exception Request Decision 

A Medical Exception Request and supporting documentation will be reviewed by the Vice President of 
Student Affairs after the Office of Student Affairs receives all documents related to the request. A decision will 
be sent to the student via U.S. Mail to the address provided on the Medical Exception Request Form. 

Readmission to the University 

Readmitted students are responsible for meeting all academic requirements in effect at the time they are 
readmitted,  not  at  the  time  they  were  originally  admitted  to  the  University.  Students  granted  a  Medical 
Exception  may  also  be  required  to  fulfill  additional  requirements  as  a  condition  of  granting  the  Medical 
Exception, such as obtaining clearance from their medical provider. 

Attendance 

The attendance policy for each course section is at the discretion of the instructor, and it is the 
instructor’s responsibility to inform the student of the attendance policy in his or her syllabus. Instructors 

53 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should not re- duce a course grade for absences of less than 20% of the course contract hours caused by active 
participation in the following events: 
• 
• 
•  Classroom field trips approved by the Department Chair of the school sponsoring the field trip or 

Scheduled varsity athletic competition 
Scheduled make-up season and post-season varsity athletic completion 

Provost 
Sanctioned performing arts appearances at non-University facilities 
Specifically sanctioned events approved by the Provost 

• 
• 
•  Religious observances 

Student Responsibilities 

Students are encouraged to adopt schedules that maximize their class participation. Those who miss classes 
are responsible for missed academic work and classroom instruction. They should coordinate with instructors 
to  complete  missed  assignments  and  obtain  classroom  materials,  notes,  and  instructions.  Student  athletes 
should inform their instructors of athletic completion participation. 

Notification of Extended and Serious Illness 

Students who miss class for serious and extended illnesses may request the assistance of the Student Health 
and Counseling office in notifying their faculty members. The responsibility of arranging to make up missed 
assignments or to submit assignments late belongs to the student. Participation in certain University events 
and/or work-related travel may, at the discretion of the faculty member, constitute an excused absence. 

Leave of Absence 

A student may submit a Leave of Absence (LOA) request to the Office of the University Registrar if the 

student is either (a) on-ground, whether full- or part-time, and will miss one semester of classes, or (b) fully 
online and will miss two or more consecutive eight-week sessions. Failure to do so will require the student to 
be readmitted to the University and to follow the program of study in effect during the term of return. 

A student must hold a cumulative G.P.A. of 2.0 or above to apply for a Leave of Absence.  A student 
who is granted a Leave of Absence may, upon their return, resume their studies under the major/program 
requirements in place during their last term of attendance; the student’s program year will not be moved 
forward unless specifically requested by an advisor.  Any University financial aid will be maintained; however, 
the continuation of any previously awarded State or Federal financial aid packages is not guaranteed. Please 
see the Office of Financial Aid for more information. 

If a student extends a Leave of Absence beyond one year, the student will be required to apply for 
readmission to the University and will be assigned to the most current degree requirements for the student’s 
major – if that program is still available. If the program is no longer available, the student will be required to 
choose a new program. 

A Leave of Absence request is not equivalent to a complete withdrawal, which is a separate process that 

requires a different form to be submitted to the Office of the University Registrar within the published 
deadlines. 

Former students re-applying for admission to the University are subject to the same fees and evaluation 

processes as first-time applicants. Re-admitted students will continue their studies under the provisions of the 
graduation requirements in effect when they return to the University. If the desired degree’s program has 
substantially changed since the last term of attendance, the student may be moved and placed under the 
newest degree requirements. 

Transfer Credit Policy 

The University may grant transfer credits from accredited institutions. A minimum course grade of "C -” is 
required for consideration of transfer of course credit. Transfer courses must have comparable course learning 
outcomes to those at Point Park University. Transfer credits are designated with "PT" on the transcript and 
carry no quality points. Evaluation and acceptance of credits completed ten years or more prior to the transfer 
request is exceptional. The ultimate decision in such cases resides with the department chair. 

54 

 
 
 
 
 
Point Park University awards credit in semester hours. One credit is equivalent to 14 hours of class meeting 
time or equivalent instructional activities. The maximum number of credits the University will grant for work 
completed through any combination of two-year colleges or the first two years at a four-year college is 70 credits. 
The University may grant an additional 20 credits, bringing the total to 90, for courses completed at the 300 
and 400 levels at four-year colleges and universities. All students must meet the University’s final 24 of the final 
30 hours residency requirement. 

Students must submit official transcripts from each institution attended to the Office of Admission. Transfer 
students may submit course descriptions and syllabi to assist in the course evaluation process. Students should 
begin  the  transfer  process  as  early  as  possible  to  provide  accurate  information  during  registration.  Final 
evaluations of transfer credits are conducted by the Office of the University Registrar. 

Point Park University may accept transfer credit from non-accredited institutions or entities under specific 

circumstances. All such credits are subject to individual review and must meet the following criteria: 

•         Courses must be successfully completed 
•         Courses must be reviewed and approved by the American Council on Education (ACE) 
•         A maximum of 12 semester credit hours may be transferred from non-accredited sources 
 All transfer credits from non-accredited institutions or entities must be  reviewed and approved by the 
Registrar’s Office prior to being applied toward a degree program. Acceptance of these credits is not guaranteed 
and will be evaluated in the context of the student’s academic program and institutional standards. 

Statute of Limitations 

Students are expected to make steady and timely progress in their degree programs. In the absence of more 
stringent rules imposed for good cause by the schools and departments, students demonstrate steady and timely 
progress by completing all degree requirements within a time span of 10 years. These requirements include all 
for-credit  experiences  such  as  courses  (whether  taken  at  Point  Park  University  or  elsewhere),  evaluations, 
examinations, internships, and performances. 

If a student wishes to apply credits older than 10 years to his or her degree requirements, these credits will 
be evaluated by the appropriate department faculty. Faculty may accept or reject credits older than 10 years; 
their decision to accept or reject must be in writing and will become part of the student’s permanent academic 
records.  If  the  decision  is  to  reject  some  or  all  the  older  credits,  the  student’s  faculty  advisor  will  help  the 
student to develop a plan for completing his or her degree if such a plan is feasible. 

Students may appeal the faculty’s decision on older credits to the Provost, who has the final authority to 

accept or reject such credits. 

Transfer Student Appeal Process 

Students should review their official transfer credit evaluation for accuracy. If any omissions or errors are 
discovered, then students have the right to appeal the evaluation. Those appeals can occur upon admission to 
Point Park or during their enrollment, following the steps outlined below. 

1.  Upon  admission  to  the  University  and  receipt  of  the  Transfer  Credit  Evaluation,  the  student  should 
complete the Transfer Credit Appeal Form and submit it to the Office of the University Registrar. Students 
may complete the form to appeal decisions on transfer credit evaluations, specifically for courses that have 
been rejected. The Office of the University Registrar will review and correct any errors and correct errors 
and/or omission if appropriate 
a.  Students are responsible for gathering and submitting supporting documentation such as prior syllabi 
and course descriptions. An incomplete form with insufficient documentation will result in denial of 
said request. 

2. 

3. 

If the situation is not resolved to the satisfaction of the student, he/she may appeal in writing within 10 
calendar days to the department chair. This document must explain why the decision at the informal level 
should be changed. If there is a resolution, the department chair will forward the decision to the Office of 
the University Registrar. 
If the student is not satisfied with the department chair review, then within 10 calendar days, they may 
make a written final appeal to the appropriate academic dean. 

55 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Post-Matriculation Transfer Credit Policy 

Students currently enrolled at Point Park University who wish to earn credit for work completed at other 
institutions, a College Level Examination Program (CLEP), or Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education 
Support (DANTES) during the summer or any other academic term (with the exception of full-time students 
who  cross-register)  must  obtain  permission  from  their  academic  chairperson  prior  to  registering  for  the 
course(s). Courses must be taken at an accredited institution and must earn a grade of “C” or above. Students 
must  request  this  permission  by  filing  a  Request  to  Transfer  Credits  form  to  be  approved  by  the  department 
chairperson and the Office of the University Registrar; therefore, credits will not be accepted for a course if a 
student has not obtained formal permission. International students who request  to take  courses at another 
institution  must  also  receive  permission  from  the  International  Student  Services  and  Enrollment  Office. 
Students may not repeat failed Point Park University courses for credit at another institution or receive CLEP or DANTES 
credit for that course. 

Requests to Transfer Credits 
Point Park University maintains the following policies on requests to transfer credits post-matriculation: 
1.  Follow the 90-credit policy, with the final 24 of 30 to be taken at the University. 
2.  Restrictions for specific majors and minors may apply. 
3.  The student must adhere to the residency requirements. 

Advanced Placement Examination (AP), 

The University may grant credit for scores of three or higher on an AP examination offered by the College 

Entrance Examination Board (CEEB). 

Armed Services 

Using the American Council on Education Guide to the Evaluation of Educational Experiences in the Armed 
Services, the University may grant credit for educational experiences in the armed services. To be considered for 
Advanced Standing Credit, students must submit appropriate documentation to both enrollment offices. 

University-Level Courses or Workshops 

Students  who  have  successfully  completed  courses  or  workshops  for  college  credit  through  in-service 
training may  submit  an  official  transcript  for  consideration.  The  University  may  grant  credit  based  on  the 
American Council on Education in the National Guide to Educational Credit for Training Programs. 

College Level Examination Program (CLEP) 

CLEP  enables  those  with  education  obtained  in  a  non-traditional  manner  to  become  eligible  for  college 
credit. The University may grant credit for CLEP results at or above the level recommended by the University 
Entrance  Examination  Board.  The  Provost,  in  coordination  with  the  appropriate  department  chairperson, 
determines course equivalencies for each examination. Students must complete a CLEP before the end of their 
Junior term (89 credits). Students should be aware that a maximum total of sixty credits may be earned through 
a combination of CLEP and DANTES, and that credits obtained in this fashion do not satisfy the residency 
requirement. Students may not repeat failed Point Park University courses for credit at another institution or 
receive CLEP or DANTES credit for that course. 

Credit by Examination 

The University may grant matriculated students’ credit by examination for any course offered at Point Park 
University for which a CLEP test is not available and for which testing is an appropriate method of evaluation, 
as determined at the discretion of the department offering the course. Students must sit for the exam prior to 
taking before taking ACCT 102. Application forms for these examinations are available from the department 
offering the course. The Registrar must receive recommendations for credit by examination at least one full 
term  prior  to  graduation.  Courses  in  different  departments  must  be  requested  on  separate  forms.  Credits 
obtained in this fashion do not satisfy the residency requirement. 

56 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support (DANTES) 

The  DANTES exam gives qualified  military personnel the opportunity to obtain academic credit, gain 
admission  to  college,  and  receive  professional  certification  based  on  job  experiences.  This  program  is  also 
available to civilian students at all American colleges and universities. The University may grant credit for the 
DANTES Subject Standardized Tests if the scores meet or exceed the level recommended by the American 
Council on Education. Students must complete a DANTES before the end of their sophomore term (90 cred- 
its). The University will grant no more than 30 credits for these exams. The Provost, in consultation with the 
appropriate department chairperson, determines course equivalencies for each examination. Students should 
be aware that a maximum total of sixty credits may be earned through a combination of CLEP and DANTES, 
and that credits obtained in this fashion do not satisfy the residency requirement. Students may not repeat 
failed Point Park University courses for credit at another institution or receive CLEP or DANTES credit for 
that course. 

Applied Knowledge Learning 

The University  may  grant  credit for  applied  knowledge  learning  to students  whose life  or professional 
experiences encompass  college-level  learning.  Before  seeking  such  credit,  a  student  must  have  completed  a 
minimum  of  six  credits  at  Point  Park  University.  Application  forms  are  available  from  the  department 
concerned with the academic discipline at issue. A completed application includes a petition from the student, 
documentation from workplace supervisors, a portfolio or other evidence of acquired learning, and any other 
information deemed relevant by the respective department illustrating that the student has achieved the course 
objectives.  This  documentation will be maintained for five years in the respective department. The chair will 
review the petition and, in some cases, request further information before making his or her recommendation. 
Students must submit credit applications for different departments on separate forms. 

The Registrar must receive recommendations for applied knowledge learning credit at least one term prior 
to graduation. Under no circumstances will a student receive more than eighteen credits for applied knowledge 
learning. Credits obtained in this fashion do not satisfy the residency requirement and may not be used to satisfy 
intern- ship requirements. 

Recognition of Academic Achievement 

Point Park students who achieve academic excellence are recognized by the University through a variety 

of honors and special awards. 

Graduation Honors 
Honors upon baccalaureate graduation are awarded as follows: 

G.P.A. of 3.50 to 3.69 
G.P.A. of 3.70 to 3.89 
G.P.A. of 3.90 to 4.0 

Cum Laude 
Magna Cum Laude 
Summa Cum Laude 

Outstanding Senior Awards 

The  Alumni  Association Outstanding Graduate Award is given to a senior in recognition of scholastic 

achievement, commitment to the community, a strong work ethic and service to Point Park University. 

Departmental Academic Excellence Awards 

Each  of  the  University’s  academic  departments,  based  on  departmental  criteria,  identifies  its  most 
distinguished  undergraduate  and  graduate  student.  The  Provost  will  formally  recognize  each  of  the 
distinguished graduates. 

Dean’s List 

The Dean’s List acknowledges superior academic performance of full-time students successfully completing 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
twelve or more credits during the fall and spring semesters. To appear on the Dean’s List a student must have 
earned  a  Term  Grade  Point  Average  (T.G.P.A.)  of  3.50  or  better  and  no  grade  less  than  a  “C.”  Part-Time 
students become eligible for Dean’s List recognition upon the completion of 12 credits at Point Park University. 
Part-time students must maintain a cumulative G.P.A. of 3.50 or higher and earn no grade lower than “C” in 
either the fall or spring semesters. The Dean’s List notation appears on the student’s transcript. 

Alpha Chi 

Alpha  Chi  is  a  national  honor  scholarship  society  that  promotes  academic  excellence  and  exemplary 
character among undergraduate college and university students and honors those achieving such distinction. 
Point  Park University’s Pennsylvania Eta Chapter was chartered in 1982. An invitation to join Alpha Chi is 
extended to those junior and senior students who meet Alpha Chi’s membership criteria: 
(1)  good reputation and character 
(2)  junior standing (minimum of 60 credits earned at the undergraduate level) 
(3)  one academic year of study and a minimum of 24 credits completed at Point Park University 
(4)  ranking in the top 10 percent of class (junior or senior). 

Student files are reviewed early each spring semester, and an induction ceremony is held after invitations 

have been extended and accepted. 

Pi Lambda Theta 

Founded  in  1910,  Pi  Lambda  Theta  is  an  international  honor  society  and  professional  association  in 
education that honors excellence and fosters leadership skills and intellectual values. Membership is open to 
students and professionals who have met specific academic requirements. 

Placements 

Admitted students may be required to take placement exam(s). For the most updated placement exam in- 

formation, please refer to the Academic Policies section of the Point Park University web site. 

English Placement 

Based on their high school transcripts, SAT scores and evaluation of their academic preparation, full-time 
students  may  be  required  to  take  an  English  Placement  Examination  during  orientation  and  may  be 
subsequently placed in an appropriate entry-level English course. 

During their first year on campus, students must successfully complete ENGL 101. Those entering Point 
Park  University  based  on  transfer  agreements  with  other  institutions  receive  full  academic  credit  for  any 
comparable writing course, as do those presenting adequate scores on AP examinations. The University expects 
its  graduates  to  have  the  ability  to  communicate  effectively.  That  expectation  represents  this  institution’s 
sustained commitment to the teaching of writing and its firm adherence to established standards. 

Modern Language Placement 

Modern  Language  faculty  make  the  determination  on  course  placement  for  students  continuing  post-
secondary study of a modern language. Course placement for transfer students corresponds to the competency 
level  implied  by  the  credits  transferred.  Students  wishing  merely  to  demonstrate  proficiency  in  a  modern 
language may do so through CLEP or the Advanced Placement Examination of the CEEB

58 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Registration 

The Office of the University Registrar, located on the first floor of Thayer Hall, is open Monday through 

Friday from 8:30 a.m. to. 4:30 p.m. 

Registration is critically important. It is the recurring process through which students gain entry to the 
classes they wish to attend. Only students officially registered for a given section of a course may attend class, 
earn a grade, and receive credit for their work. 

Using the applicable available course listing on PointWeb and the University website, currently enrolled 
students must register for the next term during a specified registration period. Students can register for classes 
with their student ID using the online registration system within PointWeb. To obtain the best selection of 
courses, students are encouraged not  to  wait until the start  of the semester  to register as  classes can  fill up 
quickly. Be advised that to proceed with the registration process, students must be cleared of academic, financial, 
and non-financial requisites. Full-time first year students register with the assistance of the University Advising 
Center,  while  entering  part-time  students  register  through  the  Office  of  Graduate  and  Online  Admissions. 
Continuing students register with  their  school  advisor.  Registration  is the  responsibility  of  the  student.  To 
discharge that responsibility with confidence, students should use the pre-registration period to meet with their 
academic advisors. In those meetings, students can confirm the appropriateness and efficacy of their planned 
course of study. Academic advisors must sign off on all overloads of 19-21 credits. The appropriate academic 
dean must sign off on all overloads of 22 credits or above. Students on probation who want to register for more 
than 12 credits (full-time)  or 6  credits (part-time)  must have the written  approval of the appropriate school 
department chair. 

By completing the online registration process, a student is agreeing to pay all charges on the tuition and 
fee account when due. The student also acknowledges that failure to make a required payment by the stated 
deadline  can result in late payment charges, inability to register for a future term, and/or withholding of a 
diploma. Further, this debt would be considered an educational loan. By completing this registration “under 
seal”  the  student  is  aware  that  collection  activities  may  continue  for  up  to  20  years.  In  event of  collection 
procedures or a suit to collect unpaid balances on the student’s account, the student will be charged all the 
University’s costs for collections, including legal fees, not to exceed 50% of the entire out- standing balances. 
The  Registrar  may  assess  fees,  payable  in  advance,  for  both  late  registration  and  late  schedule  changes. 
Registration and schedule changes become official only when officially approved by the Office of the University 
Registrar. 

Cross-Registration 

Point  Park  University  participates  in  the  protocol  of  cross-registration  subscribed  to  by  the  Pittsburgh 
Council on Higher Education (PCHE), which gives students access to courses offered at Carlow University, 
Carnegie Mellon University, Chatham University, the Community College of Allegheny County, Duquesne 
University,  La  Roche  University,  Pittsburgh  Theological  Seminary,  Robert  Morris  University,  and  the 
University of Pittsburgh. 

Full-time students who are registered for twelve or more credits may cross-register for one course a semester 
at  the  host  institution.  Cross-registration  is  available  during  the  fall  and  spring  terms  only.  Before  cross-
registering, students must secure the written approval of their UAC advisor and the Office of the University 
Registrar. Transcripts will reflect grades and credits earned in consequence of any cross-registration. 

Transcripts 

Transcripts will not be  released to  any person or agency without proper signed authorization from the 
student or graduate. All transcript requests will be electronically processed and expedited through the National 
Student Clearinghouse. Transcripts will be sent to the student or requested third party electronically. A student 
or graduate may track an electronic transcript request from the NSC by email, text message or by logging in to 
the NSC service website. 

Transcripts can be ordered at a cost for a hard paper copy or a secure electronic copy using any major 

credit/debit card.  

59 

 
 
 
Individuals  may  request  a  free  unofficial  transcript  by  completing  a  Transcript  Request  Form.  Only 
unofficial transcripts will be processed by the Office of the University Registrar. Unofficial transcript requests 
will be processed in three to five working days. Persons wishing to pick up an unofficial transcript must give 
the Registrar 24-hour notice. 

Diplomas 

Upon successful completion and final review of degree requirements, your graduation is authorized, and 
your diploma is ordered. You must be in good financial standing with the University to receive your diploma. 
Your diploma will be mailed to you approximately six to eight weeks after the end of your term of graduation 
to the home address we have on file. If you need to change that address, please submit a Change of Address Form 
before the end of the term to the Office of the University Registrar. 

If a student finds that the name on record is inaccurate or they wish to amend the name in some way, such 
as to include a middle name or suffix, the student must email the Registrar’s Office letting them know of the 
change. The Registrar’s Office will update the student’s Diploma Name. 

Once your diploma has been mailed, you will receive an email stating your diploma is on the way. You will 
receive a second email stating you can view your eDiploma. If your original diploma has been lost, stolen, or 
damaged you may obtain a hard copy replacement for a fee. You can also request an eDiploma. You can order 
a replacement, or official eDiploma, or check your diploma status by contacting the Michael Sutter Company. 

UNDERGRADUATE CERTIFICATES  

Credit-bearing undergraduate certificates established through Point Park University are subject to the 

follow requirements:  

•  The certificate will have a minimum of 9 undergraduate credits.  
•  At least six credits must be completed through Point Park University.  
•  Transfer credits must be a “C” letter grade or better.  
•  To earn a certificate, students need a 2.0 or higher cumulative GPA in their certificate courses.  
•  All undergraduate certificate credits may be shared with the undergraduate major.  
• 
•  Certificates may be completed as part of a full degree program or may be completed as a non-degree 

Students may earn more than one certificate.  

student.  

School of Communication                                        
School of Business 
Broadcast Production                                                                    Business Management  
Broadcast Reporting                                                                      Digital Marketing 
Digital Journalism                                                                           Emergency Medical Services  
Graphic Design                                                                               Fire Service Administration  
Multimedia   
Photography                                                                                   Professional Sales 
Photojournalism                                                                            Public Administration 
Public Relations and Advertising                                                  

Marketing 

Reserve Officers Training Corps (ROTC) Program 

Army ROTC 

The Army ROTC program is open on all students at Point Park University through a cross-registration 

60 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
agreement with the University of Pittsburgh. ROTC prepares college students to become Army officers by giving 
them the tools, training, and experiences needed to help them succeed. 

Army  ROTC  courses  are  usually  taken  as  an  elective  each  semester  in  conjunction  with  the  courses 
required for the student’s degree program. College credit is received for the ROTC courses, and some courses 
may be used to fulfill degree requirements.  Students entering the program in their second year of college may 
have to attend Cadet Basic Camp in the summer after their second year. 

Students may participate during their Freshman and Sophomore years without any obligation to join the 
Army. Students have a normal college student experience like everyone else on campus, but when they graduate, 
they will be commissioned as an officer in the Army. 

Army ROTC scholarship opportunities exist for qualified students.  Scholarships and/or tuition assistance 
are also available for students who have served in the Armed Services previously or are currently serving in the 
National Guard or Reserve. 

For more information , visit the Three Rivers Battalion website, email armyrotc@pitt.edu, or call 412-624-

6254. 

Air Force ROTC (AFROTC) 

The AFROTC program is open to all full-time Point Park University students through a cross-registration 

agreement with the University of Pittsburgh.  

After completing all Air Force ROTC and academic degree requirements, cadets accept a commission as 

second lieutenants in the Air Force or Space Force, appointed by the President of the United States. 

The length of your initial service commitment depends on your career. Most officers have a four-year active-

duty service commitment. 

Students  complete  one  or  two  years  in  the  General  Military  Course  (GMC)  before  competing  for  an 
enrollment allocation into a two-week summer leadership training program at Maxwell AFB in Alabama. After 
completion of the summer training program, students are enlisted into the Professional Officer Course (POC), 
where they will take on role leading anywhere from 10–50 of their fellow cadets in weekly activities. Students 
are  under  NO  contractual  obligation  to  the  Air  Force  until  entering  the  POC  or  accepting  an  Air  Force 
scholarship. In addition to the academic portion of the curriculum, each student attends a weekly two-hour, 
hands-on “leadership laboratory” that tests both their followership and leadership abilities amongst their peers. 
This lab is used to practice various leadership and management techniques and groom students into future 
military leaders. 

For more information contact the AFROTC Detachment 730 by email at afdet730@pitt.edu, by phone at 

412-624-6031, or visit the U.S. Air Force ROTC website.

61 

 
 
ACADEMIC PROGRAMS 

Point Park University offers the Bachelor of Arts, the Bachelor of Science, the Bachelor of Fine Arts, and 
the Associate in Arts. While some of the programs of study are those traditionally found in colleges of liberal 
arts and sciences, others reflect the cultural, business, and industrial needs of the community. Emphasizing 
career  preparation  within  a  broad  educational  context,  these  programs  enhance  the  prospects  of  graduates 
seeking professional positions in today’s highly competitive job market. 

The  University  also  offers  multiple  graduate  programs.  For  a  catalog  or  further  information  on  the 

graduate programs, call the Graduate Admission Office at (412) 392-3808. 

Degrees and Academic Majors 

CONSERVATORY OF PERFORMING ARTS 

School of Dance 
Department of Concert Dance 
B.A. Dance Education (PreK – Grade 12) 
B.F.A. Dance (with concentrations in Ballet or Modern Dance) 

Department of Concert Dance 
B.F.A. Dance (with concentrations in Hip Hop or Jazz) 

School of Theatre, Film, and Animation 
Department of Film and Animation 
B.F.A. Animation 
B.A. Cinema Arts (with concentrations in Animation, Cinema, or Screenwriting) 
B.A. Cinema Arts 4+1 (Screenwriting Concentration Only) 
B.F.A. Film Production 

 (with concentrations in Cinematography, Directing, Editing, Producing or Sound) 

B.F.A. Screenwriting 
B.F.A. Screenwriting 4+1 

Department of Theatre 
B.F.A. Acting 
B.F.A. Musical Theatre 
B.F.A. Contemporary Theatre Making  

(with concentrations in Directing, Playwriting, or Self-Directed Studies) 

B.F.A. Theatre Production 

(with concentrations in Design, Stage Management, or Technical Design and Management) 

SCHOOL OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 

Department of Literature, Culture, and Society 
B.A. English 
B.A. Creative Writing 
B.A. History 
B.A, B.S. Interdisciplinary Studies 
B.A. International and Environmental Studies 

62 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B.A. Legal Studies 
B.A., B.S. Liberal Studies with an Elected Area of Concentration 
B.A. Political Science 
B.A. Social Justice Studies 

Department of Psychology 
B.A. Behavioral Sciences 
B.A. Psychology  
B.A./M.A. Psychology 

Department of Natural Sciences and Engineering   
B.S. Biological Sciences 
B.S. Civil Engineering 
B.S. Electrical Engineering 
B.S. Mechanical Engineering 
B.S. Entertainment Production Engineering 
B.S. Funeral Service 
B.S. Funeral Service - Capstone 

Department of Criminal Justice and Intelligence Studies 
B.S. Criminal Justice 
B.S. Forensic Science 
B.S. Intelligence and National Security  

ROWLAND SCHOOL OF BUSINESS 

Department of Business Analytics and Technology 
B.S. Accounting  
Post Baccalaureate B.S. Accounting 
B.S. Applied Computer Science 
B.S. Economics and Finance  

Department of Community Engagement and Leadership 
B.A. Organizational Leadership  
B.S. Public Administration 
Certificate in Emergency Medical Services Administration  
Certificate in Fire Service Administration 
Certificate in Public Administration 

Department of Management 
B.S. Aviation Management 
B.S. Business Management 
Post Baccalaureate B.S. Business Management 
B.S. Business Administration 
B.S. Entrepreneurship & Innovation 
B.S. Human Resource Management  
Post Baccalaureate B.S. Human Resource Management  
B.S. Marketing and Sales  
Post Baccalaureate B.S. Marketing and Sales 
Certificate in Business Management 
Certificate in Marketing 

63 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate in Digital Marketing 
Certificate in Professional Sales 

Department of Sports, Arts, Entertainment and Music Business 
B.S. Sports, Arts, Entertainment, and Music Business 
B.S. Sports Management 

SCHOOL OF COMMUNICATION 

B.A. Broadcasting 
B.A. Digital Journalism 
B.F.A. Graphic & Interactive Design 
B.A. Multimedia 
B.F.A. Photography 
B.A. Public Relations, Advertising, and Social Media 
B. A. Social Media Management (Online Only) 
 B.A. Sports Communication 
B.A-M.A. 4+1 Programs 
Bachelor’s to Master’s in Business Early Start Programs 
Certificate in Broadcast Production 
Certificate in Broadcast Reporting 
Certificate in Digital Journalism 
Certificate in Graphic Design 
Certificate in Multimedia 
Certificate in Photography 
Certificate in Photojournalism 
Certificate in Public Relations and Advertising 

SCHOOL OF EDUCATION 

A.A. Education 
A.S. Applied Science in Career and Technical Education 
B.A. Pre-Kindergarten – Grade 4 
B.A. Pre-Kindergarten – Grade 4 and Special Education (Pre-K – Grade 12) 
B.A. Special Education (PreK – Grade12) 
B.A. 4th – 8th Grade, English Concentration 
B.A. 4th – 8th Grade, Mathematics Concentration 
B.A. 4th – 8th Grade, Science Concentration 
B.A. 4th – 8th Grade, Social Studies Concentration 
B.S. Biological Sciences /Secondary Education 
B.A. English/Secondary Education 
B.A. English/Secondary Education & Special Education (PreK– Grade12) 
B.S. Mathematics/Secondary Education 
B.S. Mathematics/Secondary Education & Special Education (PreK– Grade12) 
B.A. Social Studies / Secondary Education 
B.A. Social Studies / Secondary Education & Special Education (PreK– Grade12) 
B.A. Instructional Studies 
B.A. Dance Education (PreK – Grade 12) 

64 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
B.A. Pre-Kindergarten – Grade 4 Certification Residency Program 
B.A. Special Education PreK – Grade 12 Residency Program 
Certificate in Career and Technical Teaching in Practice (CTTP) 

SCHOOL OF CONTINUING AND PROFESSIONAL STUDIES 

65 

 
 
 
 
Pre-Professional Preparation 

Law School Preparation – Department of Literature, Culture, and Society 

Preparation for the study of law requires a broad educational background with concentration in a major 
that will develop the essential analytic and expository skills. Most students will find that a liberal course of study 
(such as Political Science, Global Cultural Studies, or English) provides an excellent preparation for the study 
of law. Students preparing  for law school  are advised to choose a major area of study early in their  college 
programs and to consult with their advisor in the Department of Literature, Culture, and Society. 

Special Programs, Options and Courses 
Point Park University Composition Program 

Excellent written communication and reading skills are vital for success both in higher education and in 
the  real-world workplace. The Composition Program at Point Park  University offers courses that introduce 
students  to  the  practices  and  approaches  necessary  for  effective  writing  in  academic  contexts  and  in  future 
careers. To achieve their goals, advance their professions, and serve their communities in accordance with the 
Point Park University Mission, all students are required to: 
• 
read, understand, and analyze college-level texts. 
• 
communicate in writing that is focused, organized, and appropriate for their audience and purpose. 
•  use sources purposefully and responsibly. 
• 

respond intelligently to the range of traditional and digital forms of communication they will encounter 
as students, as members of a business or professional community, and as citizens. 
recognize and apply the conventions of edited written English. 

• 

In  the  interest  of  these  goals,  Point  Park  students  must  successfully  complete  the  Core  Fundamentals 
course, ENGL 101: College Composition.  ENGL 101 prepares students to develop persuasive arguments and 
to write effectively using sources. ENGL 101’s focus on argument makes it a good foundation for other writing-
rich courses. Students should plan to take ENGL 101 in the Fall, Spring, or Summer of their fresh- man year. 
*  For  students  who  would  like  additional  support,  guided  work  time,  and  feedback  on  their  writing, The 
Composition  Program  offers  a  one-credit  Writing  Studio.  This  one-hour  workshop  can  be  taken  in  con- 
junction  with  ENGL  101:  College  Composition  or  any  other  course  that  is  designed  as  a  writing-rich 
experience. 

*Please check with your advisor and consult your Degree Requirements. Some majors require that ENGL 101 
be taken in a specific semester or sequence of coursework. 

More about ENGL 101: College Composition 

The Core Curriculum has been designed to provide each student with the opportunity to function as a 
problem solver, an effective researcher, and an excellent communicator. As a Fundamentals course in the Core, 
ENGL 101 stresses analytical reading; thesis development; collaboration and revision; and research and writing 
from sources. ENGL 101 is also offered in a Fundamentals-Intensive format with a Writing Lab component 
for students who need additional preparation for college-level writing. Placement recommendations may re- 
quire students to take ENGL 101 in conjunction with an additional credit of lab or studio instruction. Students 
who earn F or NP grades in ENGL 101 will be required to re-take the course in conjunction with the one-credit 
Writing Studio course. Sections of Honors ENGL 101 are available for qualified students in Point Park’s Honors 
Program. 

Successful completion of ENGL 101 is essential for further  coursework and provides a foundation for 

effective written communication at the university and beyond. In ENGL 101, students will: 
• 

engage in process-oriented approaches to writing, think collaboratively about writing, and provide 

66 

 
 
 
 
 
constructive peer feedback. 
consider  audience  and  purpose  for  each  rhetorical  situation,  with  attention  to  the  development  of 
argument and appropriate support. 
locate, evaluate, and integrate primary and secondary sources to situate ideas in conversation with  other 
authors and texts. 
follow conventions for proper source documentation and correct grammar, spelling, and mechanics. 
analyze arguments from a variety of sources. 

• 

• 

• 
• 

Humanities and Human Sciences and Literary Arts majors must earn a grade of “C” or above in ENGL 101. 

In some cases, students with Advanced Placement (AP) or International Baccalaureate (IB) credit may be  
exempted from ENGL 101. 

Honors Program 

Honors Program 
The Honors Program Mission 
To facilitate a wealth of opportunities for interdisciplinary academic exploration, service to the community and 
world, and novel learning experiences in an enriching and diverse community of scholars and leaders. 

Requirements 

Honors students complete a minimum of 21 credits of honors designated courses that could include core 
classes, independent study courses, upper-level courses, or contract courses. At least two courses must be at the 
300 or 400 level. Students will enroll in three one-credit honors add-on courses – HON 299: Honors Service 
Learning, HON 399: Honors Experiential Learning, and HON 499: Honors Capstone. Classes can be adapted 
as  honors  courses  with  instructor  permission  and  completion  of  a  contract  and  approval  from  the  honors 
program director, depending on the major and students’ goals or career objectives. The student must complete 
all undertaken  coursework with a 3.0 overall QPA and all  honors coursework with a cumulative  3.5 QPA. 
Students who complete the Honors Program requirements will receive a certificate and recognition upon their 
graduation. 

Application 
Any  student  who  desires  a  challenge  may  participate  in  the  Honors  Program;  however,  students  who 
receive Presidential Scholarships are automatically invited to join the Honors Program, as are students who 
have earned a 3.5 or higher Q.P.A. in high school or at other colleges. Other students can apply either upon 
admission to Point Park or during their enrollment. 

Applications are available from the Honors Program office, 405 Lawrence Hall or the university website at 
https://www.pointpark.edu/academics/undergraduateacademics/honorsprogram/index. For  more,  please 
contact the Honors Program office at honorsprogram@pointpark.edu or 412-392-8192. 

Study Abroad Program 

The Study Abroad Program at Point Park University is an opportunity for students, not a requirement for 
their degree program. Students are responsible for all paperwork associated with the study abroad program and 
all documents necessary for traveling abroad. Students also assume all responsibilities and risks associated with 
study abroad opportunities. 

Point  Park  University  has  vetted  and  developed  affiliation  agreements  with  the  following  partners  for 

semester-long programs open to students of all majors: 
•  Regent’s University London in London, England 
•  American University of Rome in Rome, Italy 
•  University of Salford in Manchester, England 

67 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
Additionally, the following majors have program-specific partnerships available: 
•  Education – SEK International Schools Student Teaching Placement 

Point Park also partners with:  

•  CEA Study Abroad in multiple destinations 

Students are also permitted to participate in study abroad programs not affiliated with Point Park if they 
meet eligibility requirements and submit their study abroad application and all required documentation prior 
to traveling. With these types of programs, students are responsible for researching options and working with 
the program directly to meet program deadlines and requirements, as well as arranging financing. 

Students  wishing  to  participate  in  the  Point  Park  Study  Abroad  Program  must  meet  the  following 

participation requirements: 
•  Must be in good standing with the University and be able to obtain academic, financial, student conduct, 

and Student Affairs clearances with no other outstanding obligations at the University 

•  Must be a currently registered student that has completed at least one semester at Point Park prior to the 

application process 

•  Must have attained sophomore status or higher by the time of travel 
•  Must have and maintain a minimum GPA of 2.5; some programs may require a higher GPA 

Information meetings are generally held in September and February each year; students planning to study 
abroad in the spring semester should attend the September meeting; students planning to study abroad during 
the summer or fall semester should attend the February meeting. The deadline in which to apply for the spring 
semester is normally on or before October 1st; for the summer and fall semesters, it is normally on or before 
March  1st.  In  addition  to  attending  an  information  meeting  and  viewing  the  online  information,  students 
planning to study abroad should also contact the Office of Financial Aid to discuss how studying abroad will 
affect their financial aid package. 

Programs, requirements, and processes are subject to change. For more in-depth program information and 
resources,  and  the  most  current  list  of  programs  and  requirements,  email  studyabroad@pointpark.edu,  or 
consult the website. 

Faculty-Led International Group Travel 

In addition to semester-long individual study abroad opportunities, there are also occasional short-term 
international faculty-led trips. These trips are usually arranged through an academic department, or as part of 
a course in which students can participate for University credit. Examples include: 
•  Teaching  Abroad  in  the  Emerald  Isle:  Education  majors  had  the  opportunity  to  travel  to  Ireland  to 

• 

complete their student teaching practicum 
International Media Trips: As part of the International Media course, Point Park School of Communication 
and Honors Program students travel to various locations, allowing them to compare media in the U.S. 
versus other countries, as well as experience diverse cultures and networking opportunities. 

•  Cultural  and  academic  immersion  programs  in  the  Rowland  School  of  Business  enable  students  to 
experience other cultures on a personal level. Trips have included the Irish Culture and Human Resource 
Practices Immersion Trip, Disney Leadership Seminar, and the Greek Economic Experience. 

For more information on faculty-led group travel opportunities, visit the website or check with your academic 

department. 

The Individually Designed Major 

Recognizing  that  students  with  a  special  talent  or  interest  may  require  more  freedom  in  arranging  a 
program than the established curriculum allows, the University provides the Individually designed major. The 
chair of the department most closely related to the student’s area of interest and faculty members from the 
disciplines involved design the curriculum. 

An Individually designed major is considered a privilege to be granted to students with a minimum G.P.A. 

68 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of 3.00. Normally, the program will require 48 credits of course work in at least two interrelated disciplines. A 
maximum of 18 of these credits may be taken through cross-registration and a maximum of nine credits may 
be taken on an independent study basis. To initiate the program, a student must present a written proposal 
and consult with the chair of the department most closely related to the student’s areas of interest before the 
end of the sophomore year. 

Post-Baccalaureate Programs 

Students  who  already  hold  a  baccalaureate  degree  from  an  accredited  institution  and  who  meet  the 
requirements for admission to Point Park University may pursue a second baccalaureate degree in accounting, 
biotechnology, business management, human resource management, information technology, journalism and 
mass communication, and liberal studies. An associate degree in Engineering Technology is also available to 
students  with  baccalaureate  degrees.  All  other  baccalaureate  degrees  require  students  to  complete  the  full 
curricular program. 

Associate Degrees 

The  associate  degree  programs  offered  by  the  University  permit  students  to  continue  to  baccalaureate 
degree programs in the same major discipline without loss of credits. The requirements for the various associate 
degree programs offered are listed under the department headings. 

Programs Leading to State Certification in Education 

Undergraduate and graduate  programs leading to  state certification in early childhood  and elementary 
education are offered by the School of Education. Other programs leading to certification in Secondary Edu- 
cation are provided by the Department of Literature, Culture, and Society; School of Communication; and the 
Department of Natural Sciences and Engineering. All these programs include course requirements that satisfy 
the standards set by the Pennsylvania Department of Education. Upon graduation from Point Park University, 
with  the  School  of  Education's  recommendation  and  successful  completion  of  the  teacher-certification 
examinations,  students  become  eligible  for  the  Instructional  I  Certificate  issued  by  the  Commonwealth  of 
Pennsylvania.  Students  are  required  to  take  their  teacher  certification  examinations  before  beginning  the 
student teaching assignment. 

Concentration or Focus 

A concentration or focus  at Point Park  University refers to a special grouping  of courses that provides 
expertise in a specific sub-field of a major discipline. For example, majors in contemporary theatre making may 
focus on directing, playwriting, or self-directed studies. Students should consult with their academic advisors 
about the selection of a concentration or focus. 

Internships 

To  enrich  and  complement  classroom  instruction  at  Point  Park  University,  sophomores,  juniors,  and 
seniors  are  encouraged  to  pursue  internship  opportunities  in  both  for-profit  and  non-profit  organizations. 
Internships are coordinated by the Professional Career-Readiness Center. Responsibility for the accreditation 
of internships are the sole province of the academic departments. Credits obtained through applied knowledge 
learning  may not be used to satisfy internship requirements. 

Special Topics Courses 

To make available experimental or non-traditional studies or to use the talents of a particular professor, 
departments periodically offer courses in special topics. These courses are designated with 295, 395, or 495 
course numbers. 

Independent Study 

Students may request to undertake an independent study of one to six credits if a comparable course is 
not available on campus or through another institution of higher education. When that  occurs, students must 

69 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
secure a faculty supervisor for their independent study and obtain permission from the department chair and 
their academic advisor.  

Core Curriculum Requirements 
First Year Student Core Curriculum Outcomes 

Students must complete 42 credits of general education courses, known as the Core Curriculum, in order 
to graduate. The philosophical foundation that supports the implementation of the Core Curriculum stems 
directly from the Point Park University Mission Statement. The purpose of the Mission and the Core is to 
educate students in a diverse urban environment and prepare them to apply knowledge to achieve their goals, 
advance their professions, and serve their communities. Therefore, the Core Curriculum offers each Point Park 
student the opportunity to be prepared to function as an independent learner, to work and live in a society 
characterized by diversity and  change, and  to  communicate  correctly and effectively. The  Core  Curriculum 
addresses the purpose, mission, and intended outcomes of Point Park University. 

All first-time, full-time first year students will begin a new core curriculum. These freshmen will complete 
the  following  three  fundamentals’  courses  in  their  first  year:  UNIV  101:  City-University  Life,  ENGL  101: 
College Composition, and COMM 101: Oral Communication and Presentation. Students will complete core  
requirements by taking courses to improve skills in the following areas: communication, information literacy, 
problem solving, global/cultural literacy and creativity/aesthetics. 

42 credits 

Thematic Core Requirements 
Explore the World – (Choice 1) - 3 credits  

Explore the World – (Choice 2) - 3 credits  

Investigate Science - 3 credits 
Investigate Mathematics - 3 credits  
Interpret Creative Works - 3 credits  
Understand People – (Choice 1) - 3 credits  
Understand People – (Choice 2) - 3 credits  
Succeed in Business - 3 credits 
Appreciate & Apply the Arts - 3 credits  
Discover Technology - 3 credits  
Capstone - 3 credits 

Transfer Students Core Curriculum Outcomes 

The philosophical foundation that supports the implementation of the Core Curriculum stems directly 
from  the  Point  Park  University  Mission  Statement:  Point  Park  University  educates  students  in  a  diverse  urban 
environment and prepares graduates to apply knowledge to achieve their goals, advance their professions and serve their 
communities. Accordingly, the Core Curriculum has been designed to provide each student with opportunity to 
function as a problem solver, an effective researcher, and excellent communicator. 

The  Core  Curriculum  allows  students  to  integrate  knowledge  and  insights  from  diverse  fields,  such  as 
computer and information literacy, literature, mathematics, natural and social sciences, mass communication, 
and  the  arts.  All  core  courses  emphasize  the  development  of  critical  thinking  and  written  and  oral 
communication skills. The core courses are designed to work together, regardless of the order in which they 
are taken. The Core Curriculum emphasizes interactive learning: students are encouraged to venture opinions, 
to think independently, and to seek creative solutions to intellectual, moral, and practical challenges. Thus, the 
Core Curriculum serves not only to promote understanding among an increasingly diverse student body, but 
also prepares students to participate responsibly in our highly technical, democratic society. 

70 

 
 
 
 
 
 
GRADUATE DEGREE PROGRAMS 

Information  on  all  programs  is  available  in  the  Point  Park  University  Graduate  Catalog,  which  can  be 
obtained from the Office of Graduate and Online Admissions located on the third floor of 101 Wood Street or 
by visiting the Office of Graduate and Online Admissions website. For a catalog or information, call the office at (412) 
392-3808. 

71 

 
 
Conservatory of Performing Arts Programs  

School of Dance 
Garfield Lemonius, M.F.A., Dean and Artistic Director 

Department of Concert Dance  

B.A. - Dance Education PreK-12 
B.F.A. - Dance (with concentrations in Ballet or Modern Dance) 

Department of Commercial Dance  

B.F.A. - Dance (with concentrations in Hip Hop or Jazz) 

School of Theatre, Film, and Animation 
Keisha Lalama, M.F.A., Interim Dean 

Department of Film and Animation 

B.A. - Cinema Arts (with concentrations in Animation, Cinema, or Screenwriting) 
B.A. - Cinema Arts 4+1 (Screenwriting Concentration Only) 
B.F.A. - Animation  
B.F.A. - Film Production (with concentrations in Cinematography, Directing, Editing, Producing,  

 or Sound) 

B.F.A. - Screenwriting  
B.F.A. - Screenwriting 4+1 

Department of Theatre  
B.F.A. - Acting 
B.F.A. - Musical Theatre 
B.F.A. – Contemporary Theatre Making (with concentrations in Directing, Playwriting, or Self-

Directed Studies) 

B.F.A. - Theatre Production (with concentrations in Design, Stage Management, or Technical 
Design and  

 Management) 

The  Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts  is  comprised  of  professional  artists/teachers  dedicated  to  a 
conservatory  approach  to  training.  They  believe  the  path  that  leads  from  student  to  professional,  from 
apprentice to artist is one of education, example, discipline, and experience. The Conservatory is committed 
to the development of craft, the engagement of imagination, and the cultivation of tools that enable students 
to become the protagonists in their lives.  

The  Department  of  Theatre  offers  Bachelor  of  Fine  Arts  degrees  in  Acting,  Musical  Theatre, 
Contemporary Theatre Making, and Theatre Production: Stage Management, Design, or Technical Design & 

72 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management.  The  School  of  Dance  offers  a  Bachelor  of  Fine  Arts  with  concentrations  in  Ballet,  Jazz,  and 
Modern  Dance.  The  Film  and  Animation  Department  programs  include  Animation;  Cinema  Arts  with 
concentrations  in  Animation,  Cinema,  or  Screenwriting;  Film  Production  with  concentrations  in 
Cinematography, Directing, Editing, Producing, or Sound; and Screenwriting.  

The Conservatory offers both the Bachelor of Arts and the Bachelor of Fine Arts degrees. The programs 
offered by the Conservatory combine specialized professional education and a full range of arts training within 
the  framework  of  the  liberal  arts  and  sciences.  The  Department  directs  its  efforts  toward  perfecting  the 
professional abilities of its students while emphasizing those aspects of the curriculum related to human values, 
social responsibility, and scholarship. The faculty endeavors to develop an appreciation and an awareness of 
what the arts world expects of its practitioners.  

Students must give full-time focus to academic studies and professional classes.  Regular attendance is 
required at lecture and laboratory sessions that are held in the University dance, theatre, and art facilities, and 
the photographic, film, and video laboratories. Students in Theatre and Dance must participate in productions 
that  are  performed  for  the  academic  community  and  the  public.  Continuing  professional  development  is 
required of all majors since the University curriculum and the performance programs are designed to develop 
the students’ potential to the highest level. The Bachelor of Fine Arts program is open only to those students 
who, in the opinion of the faculty, possess the level of maturity, discipline, and ambition required to complete 
this intensive program.  

The faculty reserves the right at any time to recommend a change of focus or major for students who 
do  not  respond  to  the  professional  expectations  of  the  program.  All  programs  maintain  conservatory 
intensity within a liberal arts context. Please note: Non-compliance with policies of the program may result 
in dismissal from the program.  

Concert Dance  
Professors: Susan Stowe, B.F.A. (Chair)  
Associate Professors: Colleen Hooper, Ph.D.; Jason McDole, M.F.A. 
Assistant Professors: Julia Erickson, B.F.A.; Jesse Factor, M.F.A; Jae Man Joo, B.F.A; Marc Spaulding M.F.A. 
Visiting Assistant Professor: Norbert De La Cruz, M.F.A. 
Teaching Artist: Daniel Karasik, M.F.A. 
Professor Emeritus/Emerita: Doug Bentz, B.A.; Jay Kirk, M.F.A.; Ronald Hutson 
Associate Professor Emerita: Judith Leifer-Bentz 

Commercial Dance  
Associate Professors: Kiki Lucas, M.F.A. (Chair); Crystal Frazier, M.F.A. 
Assistant Professors: Beverly Bautista, M.F.A. 
Artist in Residence: Lloyd Culbreath 

The  University  confers  the  Bachelor  of  Fine  Arts  degree  upon  graduates  of  the  Dance  program.  All 
students  who  apply  for  entrance  into  the  Dance  program  are  required  to  audition  for  artistic  acceptance. 
Accepted  students  take  a  prescribed  core  curriculum  during  the  first  year.  Incoming  students,  who,  in  the 
faculty's judgment, possess the level of maturity, discipline, and ambition required of a more intensive program, 
will be designated as BFA candidates and reassessed at the end of the freshman year. In the case of transfer 
students, the application must be made by February 1 of their second term at Point Park University. 

The Dance program at Point Park University is professionally oriented, and all students accepted into the 
program should expect a level of training and discipline that reflects this emphasis. Many elements contribute 
to  the  success  of  a  professional  in  the  area  of  dance.  Included  in  these  elements  are  good  physical  health, 
intelligence, talent, dedication, and a willingness to work long hours to achieve success. Students’ grades in 

73 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dance courses reflect the faculty’s evaluation of these important elements. All of these items are an integral part 
of the Point Park University Dance program, and all students are expected to participate fully in the program 
in order to achieve these goals.  

During  the  entire  period  students  are  pursuing  a  degree  in  Dance  at  Point  Park  University,  they  are 
continually  evaluated  as  potential  dance  professionals.  During  their  years  of  dance  training  at  Point  Park 
University, should a student fail to respond fully to the program, the faculty reserves the right to make one or 
more of the  following  recommendations: a)  change  in dance concentration, b) placement on departmental 
academic probation, c) transfer to a new academic major with a Dance minor, or d) transfer to a new academic 
major.   

Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a Major in Dance 

The Conservatory requires 123-125 credits with concentrations in Ballet, Hip Hop, Jazz, or Modern. This 
program is restricted to those who are, in the opinion of the faculty, qualified to pursue professional careers as 
dancers. Acceptance into the Bachelor of Fine Arts program is dependent upon the prerequisite Grade Point 
Average (G.P.A.) and the approval of the Dance faculty.  

Program Objectives:  

1.  Demonstrate professional competence, including a high-level of technical skill. 
2.  Compare western and non-western dance forms within historical, cultural, and stylistic 

contexts.   

3.  Apply knowledge of the body and kinesiology in theory and practice.  
4.  Demonstrate a fundamental knowledge of choreographic principles. 
5.  Create a personal career plan.  

42 credits  

32 credits  

Core Requirements  
DANC 224 History of Dance I - Explore the World 
NSET 133 Kinesiology - Investigate Science 
DANC 225 Dance History II - Interpret Creative Works 
DANC 480 Entrepreneurship and the Arts - Senior Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  
BAL 111 Ballet I - 3 credits  
DANC 109 Elements of Production for Dancers - 2 credits  
DANC 115 Music Fundamentals for Dancers - 2 credits  
DANC 130 Production/Rehearsal/Performance I - 1 credits   
DANC 131 Production/Rehearsal/Performance II - 1 credits  
DANC 153 Dancer Wellness - 1 credits 
DANC 163 Somatic Preparation - 1 credit 
DANC 180 Dance Improvisation - 1 credit 
DANC 230 Production/Rehearsal/Performance III - 1 credit  
DANC 231 Production/Rehearsal/Performance IV - 1 credit 
DANC 280 Dance Composition I - 2 credits  
DANC 281 Dance Composition II - 2 credits 
DANC 355 Dance Aesthetics- 1 credits 
DANC 365 Dance Pedagogy I - 2 credits 
JAZ 111 Jazz I - 3 credits  
JAZ 121 Jazz II - 3 credits  

74 

 
 
 
 
 
 
51 credits  

MOD 111 Modern I - 3 credits  
Choose 2 credits: 
DANC 380 Dance Composition III - 2 credits  
DANC 381 Advanced Repertory - 2 credits 

Choose a Concentration in Ballet, Hip Hop, Jazz, or Modern:  
Ballet  
BAL 121 Ballet II - 3 credits  
BAL 171 Classical Ballet Partnering I - 1 credit  
BAL 181 Classical Ballet Partnering II - 1 credit  
BAL 211 Ballet III - 3 credits  
BAL 221 Ballet IV - 3 credits  
BAL 271 Classical Ballet Partnering III - 1 credit 
BAL 291 Ballet Repertoire I - 1 credit 
BAL 311 Ballet V - 3 credits  
BAL 321 Ballet VI - 3 credits  
BAL 411 Ballet VII - 3 credits 
BAL 421 Ballet VIII - 3 credits 
DANC 107 Character Dance I - 1 credit 
JAZ 201 Supplemental Jazz I - 2 credits 
JAZ 202 Supplemental Jazz II - 1 credit 
JAZ 301 Supplemental Jazz III - 2 credits 
JAZ 302 Supplemental Jazz IV - 1 credit 
JAZ 401 Supplemental Jazz V - 2 credits 
JAZ 402 Supplemental Jazz VI - 1 credit 
MOD 121 Modern II - 3 credits  
MOD 201 Supplemental Modern I - 2 credits 
MOD 202 Supplemental Modern II - 1 credit 
MOD 301 Supplemental Modern III - 2 credits 
MOD 302 Supplemental Modern IV - 1 credit 
MOD 401 Supplemental Modern V - 2 credits 
MOD 402 Supplemental Modern VI - 1 credit 

Women Only:  
BAL 131 Point I - 1 credit 
BAL 141 Point II - 1 credit 
BAL 231 Point III - 1 credit 
BAL 241 Point IV - 1 credit 

Men Only: 
BAL 151 Classical Allegro and Turning Techniques I - 1 credit 
BAL 161 Classical Allegro and Turning Techniques II - 1 credit 
BAL 251 Classical Allegro and Turning Techniques III - 1 credit 
BAL 261 Classical Allegro and Turning Techniques IV - 1 credit 

Hip Hop  
49 credits (women); 50 credits (men) 
BAL 171 Classical Ballet Partnering I - 1 credit (Men Only) 
DANC 106 Cultural Dance Forms (1-3) - 2 credits 
DANC 227 Hip Hop Culture & Social Commentary - 3 credits 
DANC 236 Contemporary Partnering I - 1 credit  
DANC 237 Contemporary Partnering II - 1 credit  
HHP 111 Hip Hop I: Social Dance - 3 credits 

75 

 
 
 
 
 
HHP 121 Hip Hop II: Social Dances - 3 credits 
HHP 211 Hip Hop III - 3 credits 
HHP 221 Hip Hop IV - 3 credits 
HHP 291 Hip Hop Rep I - 2 credits 
HHP 311 Hip Hop V - 3 credits 
HHP 321 Hip Hop VI - 3 credits 
HHP 401 Hip Hop Improvisation/Freestyle I - 2 credits 
HHP 402 Hip Hop Improvisation/Freestyle II - 2 credits 
HHP 411 Hip Hop VII: Street Jazz - 3 credits 
HHP 421 Hip Hop VIII - 3 credits 
JAZ 201 Supplemental Jazz I - 2 credits 
JAZ 202 Supplemental Jazz II - 2 credits 
JAZ 301 Supplemental Jazz III - 2 credits 
JAZ 302 Supplemental Jazz IV - 2 credits 
JAZ 401 Supplemental Jazz V - 2 credits 
JAZ 402 Supplemental Jazz VI - 2 credits 
THEA 111 Introduction to Acting I - 3 credits 

Jazz  
49 credits (women); 50 credits (men) 
BAL 121 Ballet II - 3 credits  
BAL 171 Classical Ballet Partnering I - 1 credit (Men Only) 
BAL 201 Supplemental Ballet I - 2 credits 
BAL 202 Supplemental Ballet II - 1 credit 
BAL 301 Supplemental Ballet III - 2 credits 
BAL 302 Supplemental Ballet IV - 1 credit 
BAL 401 Supplemental Ballet V - 2 credits 
BAL 402 Supplemental Ballet VI - 1 credit 
DANC 105 Tap Dance I - 1 credit 
DANC 236 Contemporary Partnering I - 1 credit  
DANC 237 Contemporary Partnering II - 1 credit  
JAZ 211 Jazz III - 3 credits  
JAZ 221 Jazz IV - 3 credits  
JAZ 311 Jazz V - 3 credits  
JAZ 321 Jazz VI - 3 credits  
JAZ 411 Jazz VII - 3 credits 
JAZ 421 Jazz VIII - 3 credits 
MOD 121 Modern II - 3 credits  
MOD 201 Supplemental Modern I - 2 credits 
MOD 202 Supplemental Modern II - 1 credit 
MOD 301 Supplemental Modern III - 2 credits 
MOD 302 Supplemental Modern IV - 1 credit 
MOD 401 Supplemental Modern V - 2 credits 
MOD 402 Supplemental Modern VI - 1 credit 
THEA 116 Singing for Dancers - 1 credit 
THEA 111 Introduction to Acting I - 3 credits 

76 

 
 
 
 
49 credits 

Modern  
BAL 121 Ballet II - 3 credits  
BAL 171 Classical Ballet Partnering I - 1 credit (Men Only) 
BAL 201 Supplemental Ballet I - 2 credits 
BAL 202 Supplemental Ballet II - 1 credit 
BAL 301 Supplemental Ballet III - 2 credits 
BAL 302 Supplemental Ballet IV - 1 credit 
BAL 401 Supplemental Ballet V - 2 credits 
BAL 402 Supplemental Ballet VI - 1 credit 
DANC 181 Contact Improvisation I - 1 credit 
DANC 236 Contemporary Partnering I - 1 credit  
DANC 237 Contemporary Partnering II - 1 credit  
JAZ 201 Supplemental Jazz I - 2 credits 
JAZ 202 Supplemental Jazz II - 1 credit 
JAZ 301 Supplemental Jazz III - 2 credits 
JAZ 302 Supplemental Jazz IV - 1 credit 
JAZ 401 Supplemental Jazz V - 2 credits 
JAZ 402 Supplemental Jazz VI - 1 credit 
MOD 121 Modern II - 3 credits  
MOD 211 Modern III - 3 credits 
MOD 221 Modern IV - 3 credits  
MOD 311 Modern V - 3 credits  
MOD 321 Modern VI - 3 credits  
MOD 411 Modern VII - 3 credits  
MOD 421 Modern VIII - 3 credits  
MOD 291 Modern Dance Repertory I - 1 credit  

Cultural Dance Forms Options: Men Choose 2 credits; Women Choose 3 credits 
DANC 105 Tap Dance I - 1-3 credits  
DANC 106 Cultural Dance Forms - 1-3 credits  

Minimum credits for B.F.A. degree  

123 - 125 credits 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Dance Education 

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements  
DANC 224 History of Dance I - Explore the World  

42 credits  

77 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
NSET 133 Kinesiology - Investigate Science 
DANC 225 History of Dance II - Interpret Creative Works 
EDUC 120 Building Family Partnerships OR 

EDUC 220 Family & Community Diversity - Understand People  

EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 251 Arts and Music in Teaching - Appreciate & Apply the Arts 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology  
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

Department General Requirements  
Natural Sciences (3)  
MATH 100+ level - 3 credits 

3 credits  

Education Department Requirements 

36 credits  

EDUC 150 Introductions to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits 
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 317 Methods of Teaching Dance - 3 credits 
EDUC 401 Differentiated Reading for the Developing Child - 3 credits OR 
        EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary School - 3 credits  
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits   
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits 
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 

39 credits 

Dance Requirements 
BAL 111 Classical Ballet I - 3 credits  
DANC 109 Elements of Production for Dancers I - 2 credits 
DANC 115 Music Fundamentals for Dancers - 2 credits 
DANC 153 Dancer Wellness - 1 credit 
DANCE 163 Somatic Preparation for Technique - 1 credit 
DANC 180 Dance Improvisation - 1 credit 
DANC 280 Dance Composition I - 2 credits   
DANC 281 Dance Composition II - 2 credits  
DANC 355 Dance Aesthetics and Criticism - 1 credit 
JAZ 111 Jazz I - 3 credits 
MOD 111 Modern I - 3 credits 

Choose a Concentration (15 credits) 
Ballet  
BAL 121 Classical Ballet II - 3 credits 
BAL 211 Classical Ballet III - 3 credits 
BAL 221 Classical Ballet IV - 3 credits 
BAL 311 Classical Ballet V - 3 credits 
BAL 321 Classical Ballet VI - 3 credits 

78 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jazz  
JAZ 121 Jazz II - 3 credits 
JAZ 211 Jazz III - 3 credits 
JAZ 221 Jazz IV - 3 credits 
JAZ 311 Jazz V - 3 credits 
JAZ 321 Jazz VI - 3 credits 

Modern  
MOD 121 Modern II - 3 credits 
MOD 211 Modern III - 3 credits 
MOD 221 Modern IV - 3 credits 
MOD 311 Modern V - 3 credits 
MOD 321 Modern VI - 3 credits 

Choose 3 credits from the following areas: 

BAL 131 Pointe I - 1 credit 
BAL 141 Pointe II - 1 credit 
BAL 231 Pointe III - 1 credit 
BAL 171 Pas de Deux I - 1 credit 
BAL 181 Pas de Deux II - 1 credit 
BAL 271 Pas de Deux III - 1 credit 
BAL 291 Ballet Repertoire - 1 credit OR 

MOD 291 Modern Dance Repertory I - 1 credit  

DANC 106 Cultural Dance Forms I - 1 credit 
DANC 105 Tap Dance I - 1 credit 

DANC 107 Character Dance I - 1 credit 

DANC 236 Contemporary Partnering I - 1 credit 

TESTS FOR CERTIFICATION: To be determined from PDE 
Minimum credits for B.A. degree   120 credits 

Film and Animation Department 
Professors: Laura Boyd, M.F.A; Fredrick Johnson, M.F.A.; Andrew Halasz, M.F.A. (Chair); Nelson Chipman, 
Ed.D. 
Associate Professors: David Morrison, M.F.A.; Matthew Pelfrey, M.F.A.; Jonathan Trueblood, M.F.A.; Kelly 
Donnellan, M.F.A.; Hanjin Park, M.F.A; Kyu Park, M.F.A. 
Assistant Professors: H Haden Hammond A.S. 
Senior Teaching Artist: Elise D’Haene, Ph.D.; Richard Hawkins, B.A. 
Artist in Residence: Geoff Munn, B.S. 

79 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Film and Animation Department is an innovative media production program within the Conservatory 
of Performing Arts of Point Park University. Dedicated to a conservatory approach to training, the Cinema 
Arts  program  emphasizes  professional,  practical,  and  liberal  arts  education,  both  in  theory  and  execution. 
Exploring the integration of media and the arts in our society and the impact of technology on our culture, the 
curriculum  is  designed  to  provide  practical,  professional  training  in  animation  and  visual  effects,  cinema 
production,  and  screenwriting  while  developing  a  sound  foundation  in  the  arts  and  humanities.  Theory, 
cinema history, and aesthetics are taught as  an  integral part of  developing  communication and production 
skills.  

The mission of the department is to educate, train, and artistically equip students with the skills necessary 
to compete in the commercial media industry. The Film and Animation Department offers a four-year, 120-
credit Bachelor of Arts degree in Cinema Arts. In addition, the Film and Animation Department offers a four-
year 126-credit Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Animation, a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree in Screenwriting, 
and  a  Bachelor  of  Fine  Arts  degree  in  Film  Production  with  concentrations  in  cinematography,  directing, 
editing, sound, or producing.  A portfolio application is required to enter each of the degree  programs. All 
applicants must be approved by either the Chair of the Film and Animation Department or by the Director of 
Academic Administration in the Conservatory of Performing Arts. Enrollment is limited to only those students 
accepted into the degree program. Students transferring from other institutions should be prepared to spend 
potentially up to three years to complete a program and should take this into consideration before submitting 
their applications for admission. At the end of the academic semester, the Faculty will review the academic 
performances of all Film and Animation students. In the event of unsatisfactory academic performance, the 
faculty  reserves  the  right  to  make  one  of  the  following  recommendations:  a  change  in  department  major, 
placement  on  academic  probation,  or  transfer  to  a  new  academic  major  outside  the  Film  and  Animation 
Department.   

Near the beginning of the second-year spring semester, all BFA (Screenwriting, Animation, and Cinema 
Production) students will submit a portfolio application. A committee that consists of full-time faculty from 
the program will review each portfolio application to determine if and/or how each student will continue on 
in the Film and Animation Department. Students will be notified about the decision of their application from 
the committee by the middle of the spring semester. 

Q.P.A Requirements: 
BFA students are required to maintain a Q.P.A of 3.0 or higher. 
BA students are required to maintain a Q.P.A of 2.5 or higher. 
All  Cinema  Arts  students  are  required  to  maintain  a  Q.P.A  of  3.0  or  higher  to  maintain  their  artistic 
scholarship. 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a Major in Cinema Arts 

Program Objectives  

1.  Critique written and visual media from a technical, aesthetic, and narrative perspective.  
2. 

Identify  and  articulate  the  characteristics  and  distinctions  of  historically  significant  cinematic 
works, artists, and theories. 

3.  Demonstrate creative and critical proficiency in the skills and craft of cinema arts to tell a story 

and articulate meaning. 

4.  Apply  the  foundational  skills  and  craft  of  a  working  professional  in  cinema  arts  by  meeting 
deadlines, contributing to a collaborative artistic environment, and successfully participating and 
communicating with peers during assignments, discussions, and critique sessions.  

80 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Requirements  
CINE 460 Cinema Arts Professional - Senior Capstone (Cinema and Screenwriting Focus) OR 

42 credits  

DIGI 460 Animation and Visual Effects Capstone - Senior Capstone (Animation Focus) 

30 credits  

Department Major Requirements  
CINE 102 History of American Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 105 Introduction to Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 201 Cinematic Representation - 3 credits 
CINE 205 Narrative Structure of Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 301 Cinema Studies - 3 credits 

Select ONE area of focus - 15 credits 
Cinema Focus 
CINE 101 Introduction to Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 110 History of International Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 150 Production 1 - 6 credits 
CINE 210 Visual Analysis - 3 credits 
Animation Focus 
DIGI 101 Fundamentals of Design Animation - 3 credits 
DIGI 102 Digital Design Tools and Techniques - 3 credits 
DIGI 210 Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
DIGI 220 Fundamentals of Animation - 3 credits 
DIGI 305 History of Animation - 3 credits 
Screenwriting Focus 
CINE 101 Introduction to Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 110 History of International Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 305 Intermediate Screenwriting - 3 credits 
CINE 306 Story Analysis - 3 credits 
CINE 326 Acting/Directing for Writers and Filmmakers - 3 credits 

Major Electives                                                                                                                        15 credits  
Only one section of CINE 301 and one section of CINE 302 are allowed to count towards the Major 
Electives 
3-credits must be a 400-level course 

ART 213 Intro to Drawing - 3 credits 
ART 320 Figure Drawing - 3 credits 
DIGI 102 Digital Tools and Techniques - 3 credits  
DIGI 210 Fundamentals of Motion Graphics - 3 credits  
DIGI 220 Fundamentals of Animation - 3 credits  
DIGI 305 History of Animation - 3 credits 
DIGI 311 Intermediate Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
CINE 110 History of International Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 150 Production I - 6 credits 
CINE 208 Classical and Modern Drama - 3 credits       
CINE 210 Visual Analysis - 3 credits  

81 

 
 
 
 
 
CINE 250 Production II - 6 credits  
CINE 301 Cinema Studies - Various Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 302 Cinema Authors - Various Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 305 Intermediate Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 306 Story Analysis - 3 credits 
CINE 308 History of TV Entertainment-1936-2000 - 3 credits 
CINE 310 Intermediate Directing - 3 credits  
CINE 315 Intermediate Producing - 3 credits  
CINE 320 Intermediate Editing - 3 credits  
CINE 325 Intro to Visual Effects - 3 credits  
CINE 326 Acting and Directing for Writers and Filmmakers - 3 credits 
CINE 327 Acting for the Camera - 3 credits 
CINE 330 Intermediate Sound - 3 credits  
CINE 332 Music Scoring for Filmmaking - 3 credits 
CINE 335 Intro to Production Design - 3 credits 
CINE 340 Intermediate Cinematography - 3 credits  
CINE 345 Fundamentals of Documentary - 3 credits  
CINE 350 Production III - 6 credits 
CINE 354 Alternative Forms Workshop: Various Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 362 Writing the Situation Comedy - 3 credits  
CINE 363 Writing the Hour Drama - 3 credits  
CINE 364 Writing for Multimedia - 3 credits 
CINE 365 Writing the Adaptation - 3 credits 
CINE 367 Writing for Video Games - 3 credits  
CINE 368 Writing for Television Animation - 3 credits 
CINE 395 Special Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 401 Advanced Cinema Studies - 3 credits 
CINE 405 Advanced Screenwriting - 3 credits 
CINE 406 Advanced Screenwriting II - 3 credits 
CINE 412 The Professional Writer’s Life - 3 credits 
CINE 425 Advanced Visual Effects - 3 credits  
CINE 445 Documentary Production Workshop - 3 credits 
CINE 495 Special Topics - 3 credits  
CINE 498 Internship - 3 credits  
CINE 499 Independent Study - 3 credits  

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

33 credits  
120 credits  

Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a Major in Cinema Arts (Screenwriting 
Concentration) 4+1  

The B.A. in Cinema with a concentration in Screenwriting program offers an accelerated Graduate 
Degree option—a 4+1 program with the Master of Fine Arts in Writing for the Screen & Stage program. 
Students would apply to the program in their junior year and begin taking graduate level courses in their 
senior year of their undergraduate degree program. 

82 

 
 
 
 
Program Objectives  

1.  Critique written and visual media from a technical, aesthetic, and narrative perspective.  
2. 

Identify  and  articulate  the  characteristics  and  distinctions  of  historically  significant  cinematic 
works, artists, and theories. 

3.  Demonstrate creative and critical proficiency in the skills and craft of cinema arts to tell a story 

and articulate meaning. 

4.  Apply  the  foundational  skills  and  craft  of  a  working  professional  in  cinema  arts  by  meeting 
deadlines, contributing to a collaborative artistic environment, and successfully participating and 
communicating with peers during assignments, discussions, and critique sessions.  

42 credits  

30 credits  

Core Requirements  
CINE 460 Cinema Arts Professional - Senior Capstone  

Department Major Requirements  
CINE 102 History of American Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 105 Introduction to Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 201 Cinematic Representation - 3 credits 
CINE 205 Narrative Structure of Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 301 Cinema Studies - 3 credits 
Screenwriting Focus* 
CINE 101 Introduction to Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 110 History of International Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 305 Intermediate Screenwriting - 3 credits 
CINE 306 Story Analysis - 3 credits 
CINE 326 Acting/Directing for Writers and Filmmakers - 3 credits 

*Please note that the M.F.A. option for B.A. in Cinema Arts students is only available to those individuals 
that are pursuing a Screenwriting Focus.  

Major Electives                                                                                                                        15 credits  
Only one section of CINE 301 and one section of CINE 302 are allowed to count towards the Major 
Electives 
3-credits must be a 400-level course 

ART 213 Intro to Drawing - 3 credits 
ART 320 Figure Drawing - 3 credits 
DIGI 102 Digital Tools and Techniques - 3 credits  
DIGI 210 Fundamentals of Motion Graphics - 3 credits  
DIGI 220 Fundamentals of Animation - 3 credits  
DIGI 305 History of Animation - 3 credits 
DIGI 311 Intermediate Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
CINE 150 Production I - 6 credits 
CINE 208 Classical and Modern Drama - 3 credits       
CINE 210 Visual Analysis - 3 credits  
CINE 250 Production II - 6 credits  
CINE 301 Cinema Studies - Various Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 302 Cinema Authors - Various Topics - 3 credits 

83 

 
 
 
 
 
CINE 308 History of TV Entertainment-1936-2000 - 3 credits 
CINE 310 Intermediate Directing - 3 credits  
CINE 315 Intermediate Producing - 3 credits  
CINE 320 Intermediate Editing - 3 credits  
CINE 325 Intro to Visual Effects - 3 credits  
CINE 327 Acting for the Camera - 3 credits 
CINE 330 Intermediate Sound - 3 credits  
CINE 332 Music Scoring for Filmmaking - 3 credits 
CINE 335 Intro to Production Design - 3 credits 
CINE 340 Intermediate Cinematography - 3 credits  
CINE 345 Fundamentals of Documentary - 3 credits  
CINE 350 Production III - 6 credits 
CINE 354 Alternative Forms Workshop: Various Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 362 Writing the Situation Comedy - 3 credits  
CINE 363 Writing the Hour Drama - 3 credits  
CINE 364 Writing for Multimedia - 3 credits 
CINE 365 Writing the Adaptation - 3 credits 
CINE 367 Writing for Video Games - 3 credits  
CINE 368 Writing for Television Animation - 3 credits 
CINE 395 Special Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 401 Advanced Cinema Studies - 3 credits 
CINE 405 Advanced Screenwriting - 3 credits 
CINE 406 Advanced Screenwriting II - 3 credits 
CINE 412 The Professional Writer’s Life - 3 credits 
CINE 425 Advanced Visual Effects - 3 credits  
CINE 445 Documentary Production Workshop - 3 credits 
CINE 495 Special Topics - 3 credits  
CINE 498 Internship - 3 credits  
CINE 499 Independent Study - 3 credits  

M.F.A. Requirements  
MWSS 500 Dramatic Storytelling - 3 credits  
MWSS 515 Elements of Playwriting - 3 credits  
MWSS 545 Engaging the Audience - 3 credits  
MWSS 550 Advanced Writing for Screen & Stage - 4 credits  
MWSS 555 Contemporary Playwriting - 2 credits  

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

15 credits  

24 credits  
120 credits 

Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a Major in Animation  

Program Objectives  

1.  Demonstrate an understanding of aesthetic foundational principles of design, visual perception, 

time, and motion, and apply them effectively in creative work.  

84 

 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Demonstrate professional, technical, and creative proficiency in the skills and craft of animation 

or visual effects.  

3.  Apply  the  foundational  skills  and  craft  of  a  working  professional  in  animation  by  meeting 
deadlines, contributing to a collaborative artistic environment, and successfully participating and 
communicating with peers during assignments, discussions, and critique sessions. 

4.  Articulate, demonstrate, and contribute in a collaborative artistic environment.  
5.  Analyze and think critically about animation and visual effects projects.  
6.  Communicate story effectively through picture and sound.  
7. 

Identify  and  communicate  (in  oral  and  written  form)  significant  events  and  innovators  from 
cinema, animation, visual effects, and art history. 

8.  Synthesize techniques and principles from a range of related arts disciplines. 

42 credits  

 63 credits  

Core Requirements  
DIGI 460 Animation and Visual Effects Capstone - Senior Capstone  

Department Major Requirements  
ART 213 Introduction to Drawing - 3 credits 
ART 320 Figure Drawing - 3 credits 
DIGI 101 Fundamentals of Design for Animation - 3 credits  
DIGI 102 Digital Tools and Techniques - 3 credits  
DIGI 210 Fundamentals of Motion Graphics - 3 credits  
DIGI 220 Fundamentals of Animation - 3 credits  
DIGI 225 Sound for Animation and Visual Effects - 3 credits  
DIGI 230 Classical Animation - 3 credits 
DIGI 240 Introduction to 3D Animation - 3 credits 
DIGI 245 Visual Development for Animation - 3 credits 
DIGI 305 History of Animation - 3 credits 
DIGI 311 Intermediate Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
DIGI 315 3D Character Animation - 3 credits 
DIGI 325 Character Animation and Analysis I - 3 credits  
DIGI 330 Classical Animation II - 3 credits 
DIGI 350 Community Animation Project - 3 credits  
DIGI 370 Unreal for Animators I - 3 credits 
DIGI 470 Unreal for Animators II - 3 credits 
DIGI 425 Character Animation and Analysis II - 3 credits 
DIGI 451 Senior Thesis Project Part I - 3 credits 
DIGI 452 Senior Thesis - Part II - 3 credits 

Department Electives (choose a minimum of 2 courses)  

6 credits  

CINE 105 Introduction to Screenwriting - 3 credits 
CINE 150 Production 1 - 6 credits 
CINE 201 Cinematic Representation - 3 credits   
CINE 325 Intro to Visual Effects - 3 credits 
CINE 425 Advanced Visual Effects - 3 credits  
DIGI 335 Theory of Game Design - 3 credits  
DIGI 340 Concept Art - 3 credits 

85 

 
 
 
 
DIGI 345 Comics and Storyboarding - 3 credits 
CINE/DIGI 395 Special Topics in Digital Arts - 3 credits 
DIGI 399 Animation and VFX Practicum - 3 credits 
DIGI 420 Advanced Computer Animation - 3 credits  
DIGI 430 Motion Graphics and Character Animation - 3 credits 
CINE/DIGI 495 Special Topics in Digital Arts - 3 credits  
DIGI 498 Internship - 3 credits  
DIGI 499 Independent Study - 3 credits 

6 credits  

Arts/Discipline Electives (choose a minimum of 2 courses) 
ART 210 Introduction to Architecture - 3 credits 
ART 212 Graphic Design - 3 credits 
ART 313 Advanced Drawing - 3 credits 
CINE 205 Narrative Structure of Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 210 Visual Structure of Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 301 Cinema Studies: Various Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 302 Cinema Authors: Various Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 305 Intermediate Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 368 Writing for TV Animation - 3 credits 
CINE 300+ level course - 3 credits 
ENGL 365 Creative Nonfiction Workshop - 3 credits  
PRAD 206 Introduction to Advertising and PR - 3 credits 
MUS 101 Music Appreciation - 3 credits 
PHOT 204 Black and White Photography I - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Introduction to Digital Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 316 Advertising Photography - 3 credits 
SAEM 101 Introduction to the Sports, Arts, and Entertainment (SAE) Business - 3 credits  
SAEM 202 SAE Marketing and Promotion - 3 credits 
THEA 111 Introduction to Acting I - 3 credits  
THEA 112 Introduction to Acting II - 3 credits  

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

9 credits  
126 credits  

* For the B.F.A. Animation major, grades of a “D” or “F” are not considered acceptable in the following 
courses: DIGI 210, DIGI 230, DIGI 240, DIGI 310, DIGI 451, and DIGI 452. Students who earn a “D” or 
“F” in any of these courses will be required to retake the course and earn an acceptable grade before they are 
permitted to enroll in any new Digital Arts, Screenwriting or Cinema Arts courses. 

Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a Major in Film Production 

Program Objectives:  

1.  Apply the foundational skills and craft of a working professional in cinema production by 
meeting deadlines, contributing to a collaborative artistic environment, and successfully 

86 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
participating and communicating with peers during assignments, discussions, and critique 
sessions. 

2.  Demonstrate professional proficiency in one of the disciplines of cinema production.  
3.  Demonstrate an understanding of the foundational techniques of a range of art forms related 

to cinema production.  

4.  Utilize the skills and craft of a working professional in media production to tell a story and 

5. 

communicate meaning. 
Identify and communicate (in oral and written form) the characteristics and distinctions of 
historically significant cinematic works and artists.  

6.  Think analytically and critically about visual media from a technical, aesthetic, and a narrative 

perspective.  

42 credits  

51 credits  

Core Requirements  
CINE 460 Cinema Arts Professional - Senior Capstone  

Department Major Requirements  
CINE 101 Introduction to Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 102 History of American Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 105 Introduction to Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 110 History of International Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 150 Production I - 6 credits       
CINE 201 Cinematic Representation- 3 credits  
CINE 205 Narrative Structure of Cinema - 3 credits 
CINE 210 Visual Analysis - 3 credits  
CINE 250 Production II - 6 credits  
CINE 301 Cinema Studies - Various Topics OR 
           CINE 302 Cinema Authors - 3 credits 
CINE 306 Story Analysis - 3 credits 
CINE 350 Production III - 6 credits 
CINE 451 Production IV – Part I - 3 credits 
CINE 452 Production IV – Part II - 3 credits 

Department Major Electives 
(A minimum of two intermediate courses must be taken (CINE 305, CINE 310, CINE 315, CINE 320, 
CINE 330, CINE 340); a minimum of one advanced course must be taken (CINE 410, 415, 420, 430, or 
440); and a minimum of 6 credits must be taken at the 400-level) 

18 credits  

DIGI 102 Digital Design Tools and Technique - 3 credits 
DIGI 210 Fundamentals of Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
DIGI 311 Intermediate Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
DIGI 430 Advanced Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
CINE 300+ Level in Screenwriting 
CINE 305 Intermediate Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 310 Intermediate Directing - 3 credits  
CINE 315 Intermediate Producing - 3 credits  
CINE 320 Intermediate Editing - 3 credits  
CINE 325 Introduction to Visual Effects - 3 credits  

87 

 
 
 
 
 
CINE 327 Acting for the Camera - 3 credits 
CINE 330 Intermediate Sound - 3 credits  
CINE 332 Music Scoring for Filmmaking - 3 credits 
CINE 335 Intro to Production Design - 3 credits 
CINE 340 Intermediate Cinematography - 3 credits  
CINE 345 Fundamentals of Documentary - 3 credits  
CINE 354 Alternative Forms Workshop: Various Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 395 Special Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 399 Cinema Arts Practicum - 1-3 credit 
CINE 405 Advanced Screenwriting I - 3 credits 
CINE 406 Advanced Screenwriting II - 3 credits 
CINE 410 Advanced Directing - 3 credits  
CINE 415 Advanced Producing - 3 credits  
CINE 420 Advanced Editing - 3 credits  
CINE 425 Advanced Digital Effects - 3 credits  
CINE 430 Advanced Sound - 3 credits  
CINE 440 Advanced Cinematography - 3 credits  
CINE 445 Documentary Production Workshop - 3 credits 
CINE 495 Special Topics - 3 credits  
CINE 498 Internship - 3 credits  
CINE 499 Independent Study - 3 credits  

Arts/Discipline Electives (choose a minimum of 2 courses) 
                                                      6 credits  

ART 213 Intro to Drawing - 3 credits 
ART 320 Figure Drawing - 3 credits 
ENGL 365 Creative Nonfiction Workshop - 3 credits  
ENGL 366 Fiction Workshop - 3 credits  
ENGL 367 Poetry Workshop - 3 credits  
MUS 101 Music Appreciation - 3 credits 
PHOT 204 Film and Darkroom Photography I - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Introduction to Digital Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 316 Studio Lighting - 3 credits 
PRAD 206 Introduction to Advertising and PR - 3 credits  
SAEM 101 Introduction to the Sports, Arts, and Entertainment (SAE) Business - 3 credits  
SAEM 201 Event Management - 3 credit  
SAEM 202 SAE Marketing and Promotion - 3 credits 
THEA 111 Introduction to Acting I - 3 credits 
THEA 112 Introduction to Acting II - 3 credits  

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

9 credits  
126 credits  

* For the B.F.A Film Production major, grades of a “D” or “F” are not considered acceptable in the following 
courses: CINE 101, CINE 150, CINE 250, and CINE 350. Students who earn a “D” or “F” in any of these 

88 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
courses will be required to retake the course and earn an acceptable grade before they are permitted to enroll 
in any new Film and Animation Department courses.  

Students who earn a “D” of “F” in an Intermediate Elective will not be allowed to take the following Advanced 
Elective within that concentration and will be required to retake the course and earn an acceptable grade before 
they are permitted to enroll in the Advanced Elective for that concentration. 

Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a Major in Screenwriting  

Program Objectives  

1.  Apply the foundational skills and craft of a working professional in screenwriting by meeting 
deadlines, contributing to a collaborative artistic environment, and successfully participating 
and communicating with peers during assignments, discussions, and critique sessions. 

2.  Demonstrate professional skills in three or more of the following: writing for television drama, 
situation  comedies,  feature  films,  documentary  &  non-fiction  films,  adaptations,  shorts,  and 
content for the internet, animation, video games, etc. 

3.  Articulate,  demonstrate,  contribute,  and  produce  written  work  for  the  screen  and  stage  in  a 

4. 

collaborative artistic, workshop environment.   
Identify and communicate (orally and in written form) the characteristics and distinctions of 
historically significant cinematic and stage works, including movements, filmmakers, 
playwrights, and screenwriters.  

5.  Think analytically and critically about written and visual media from a technical, commercial, 

42 credits  

75 credits 

and narrative perspective.  

Core Requirements  
CINE 454 Senior Thesis II - Senior Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  
CINE 101 Introduction to Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 102 History of American Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 105 Introduction to Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 110 History of International Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 150 Production I - 6 credits   
CINE 201 Cinematic Representation - 3 credits     
CINE 205 Narrative Structure of Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 208 Classical and Modern Drama - 3 credits 
CINE 305 Intermediate Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 306 Story Analysis - 3 credits  
CINE 326 Acting and Directing for Writers and Filmmakers - 3 credits 
CINE 362, CINE 363, or CINE 368 - 3 credits 
CINE 405 Advanced Screenwriting I - 3 credits  
CINE 406 Advanced Screenwriting II - 3 credits 
CINE 412 Professional Writer’s Life - 3 credits 
CINE 416 Rewriting the Script - 3 credits 
CINE 453 Senior Thesis I - 3 credits 

89 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Choose seven courses:  
CINE 301 Cinema Studies - Various Topics - 3 credits  
CINE 302 Cinema Authors - Various Topics - 3 credits  
CINE 308 History of TV Entertainment - 1936-2000 - 3 credits  
CINE 350 Production III: Screenwriting - 6 credits 
CINE 361 Writing for Theatre - 3 credits  
CINE 362 Writing the Situation Comedy - 3 credits  
CINE 363 Writing the Hour Drama - 3 credits  
CINE 364 Writing for Multimedia - 3 credits  
CINE 365 Writing the Adaptation - 3 credits 
CINE 367 Writing for Video Games - 3 credits  
CINE 368 Writing for Television Animation - 3 credits  
CINE 395 Special Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 399 - Cinema Practicum - 1-3 credits  
CINE 495 Special Topics - 3 credits 
CINE 498 Internship - 3 credits 
CINE 499- Independent Study - 3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.F.A. degree  

9 credits 
126 credits 

* For the Screenwriting major, grades of a “D” or “F” are not considered acceptable in the following courses: 
CINE 105, CINE 205, CINE 305, CINE 405, CINE 406, CINE 416, CINE 453, and CINE 454. Students 
who earn a “D” or “F” in any of these courses will be required to retake the course and earn an acceptable grade 
before they are permitted to enroll in any new Film and Animation Department courses. 

4+1 Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a Major in Screenwriting  

The B.F.A. in Screenwriting program offers an accelerated Graduate Degree option—a 4+1 program with 
the Master of Fine Arts in Writing for the Screen & Stage program. Students would apply to the program in 
their  junior  year and begin taking  graduate level  courses in their  senior  year of their  undergraduate  degree 
program.  

Program Objectives  

1.  Apply the foundational skills and craft of a working professional in screenwriting by meeting 
deadlines, contributing to a collaborative artistic environment, and successfully participating 
and communicating with peers during assignments, discussions, and critique sessions. 

2.  Demonstrate professional skills in three or more of the following: writing for television drama, 
situation  comedies,  feature  films,  documentary  &  non-fiction  films,  adaptations,  shorts,  and 
content for the internet, animation, video games, etc. 

3.  Articulate,  demonstrate,  contribute,  and  produce  written  work  for  the  screen  and  stage  in  a 

4. 

collaborative artistic, workshop environment.   
Identify and communicate (orally and in written form) the characteristics and distinctions of 
historically significant cinematic and stage works, including movements, filmmakers, 
playwrights, and screenwriters.  

90 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  Think analytically and critically about written and visual media from a technical, commercial, 

and narrative perspective.  

Core Requirements  
CINE 454 Senior Thesis II - Senior Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  
CINE 101 Introduction to Cinema Production - 3 credits  
CINE 102 History of American Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 105 Introduction to Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 110 History of International Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 150 Production I - 6 credits   
CINE 201 Cinematic Representation - 3 credits     
CINE 205 Narrative Structure - 3 credits  
CINE 208 Classical and Modern Drama - 3 credits 
CINE 305 Intermediate Screenwriting - 3 credits  
CINE 306 Story Analysis - 3 credits  
CINE 326 Acting and Directing for Writers and Filmmakers - 3 credits 
CINE 362, CINE 363, or CINE 368 - 3 credits 
CINE 405 Advanced Screenwriting I - 3 credits  
CINE 406 Advanced Screenwriting II - 3 credits 
CINE 412 The Professional Writer’s Life - 3 credits 
CINE 416 Rewriting the Script - 3 credits 
CINE 453 Senior Thesis I - 3 credits 

Choose three courses:  
CINE 301 Cinema Studies - Various Topics - 3 credits  
CINE 302 Cinema Authors - Various Topics - 3 credits  
CINE 308 The History of TV Entertainment - 1936-2000 - 3 credits  
CINE 350 Production III: Screenwriting - 6 credits 
CINE 361 Writing for Theatre - 3 credits  
CINE 362 Writing the Situation Comedy - 3 credits  
CINE 363 Writing the Hour Drama - 3 credits  
CINE 364 Writing for Multimedia - 3 credits  
CINE 365 Writing for Adaptation - 3 credits 
CINE 367 Writing for Video Games - 3 credits  
CINE 368 Writing for Television Animation - 3 credits  
CINE 395 Special Topics in Cinema Arts - 3 credits 
CINE 399 - Cinema Arts Practicum - 1-3 credits  
CINE 495 Special Topics in Cinema Arts - 3 credits 
CINE 498 Cinema Arts Internship - 3 credits 
CINE 499 Independent Study - 3 credits 

MFA Requirements  
MWSS 500 Dramatic Storytelling - 3 credits 
MWSS 515 Elements of Playwriting - 3 credits 
MWSS 545 Engaging the Audience - 3 credits 

91 

42 credits  

75 credits 

15 credits 

 
 
 
 
 
MWSS 550 Advanced Writing for Screen and Stage - 4 credits 
MWSS 555 Contemporary Playwriting - 2 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.F.A. degree  

6 credits 
126 credits 

* For the Screenwriting major, grades of a “D” or “F” are not considered acceptable in the following courses: 
CINE 105, CINE 205, CINE 305, CINE 405, CINE 406, CINE 416, CINE 453, and CINE 454. Students 
who earn a “D” or “F” in any of these courses will be required to retake the course and earn an acceptable grade 
before they are permitted to enroll in any new Film and Animation Department courses. 

Fine Arts  

The  Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts  offers  a  selection  of  courses  in  the  Fine  Arts  beginning  with  an 
introduction to visual arts and continuing with the historical study of Western Art from ancient times through 
the  modern  period.  Opportunities  for  the  study  of  Graphic  Design,  Drawing,  and  other  special  topics  are 
available.  These  courses  serve  not  only  those  students  majoring  in  the  arts,  but  also  those  interested  in 
aesthetics, style, materials, media, and especially art as a reflection of the times.  

Music  

The Conservatory of Performing Arts offers a selection of courses in applied and theoretical music. These 
courses help performing arts majors learn the practical music skills often required in their professional careers 
and provide the entire college community with a broader choice of humanities electives. Students who elect to 
take private voice or piano for credit must arrange for a preliminary interview and/or audition.  

Those students particularly interested in the study of music should fulfill the prerequisites and complete 

the 18-credit minor in Music.  

Theatre 
Professors: Aaron Bollinger, M.F.A.; Zeva Barzell-Canali, M.F.A.; Richard Keitel, M.F.A.; Stephanie Mayer-
Staley, M.F.A.; Sheila McKenna, M.F.A; Robin Walsh, MFA; Philip Winters, M.F.A.  
Associate Professors: April Daras, M.F.A.; Samuel Muñoz, M.F.A.; Catherine Wilson, M.F.A. 
Assistant Professors: Milia Ayache, M.F.A.; Juan Rivera Lebron, M.F.A., M.S. (Chair); Colin Ruffer, M.F.A.; 
Jennifer Scheier, PhD. 
Artist in Residence: Michael Campayno, M.F.A.  
Senior Teaching Artist: Timothy Marquette, M.A. 
Professor Emeritus/Emerita: Rochelle Klein, M.M.; John Shepard, M.F.A. 

The  University  confers  the  Bachelor  of  Fine  Arts  degree  upon  graduates  of  the  Theatre  program.  All 
students  who  apply  for  entrance  into  a  Theatre  program  are  required  to  audition  or  interview,  and  those 
accepted take a prescribed curriculum during their first few years. 

Students are pursuing a Theatre degree at Point Park and are evaluated continually as potential theatre 
professionals. Should a student fail to respond fully to the program, the faculty reserves the right to make one 
or  more  of  the  following  recommendations:  (a)  change  in  theatre  degree,  (b)  placement  on  departmental 
academic probation, or (c) transfer to a new academic major.  
* All sequential courses must be taken in order with strict adherence to prerequisites observed.  

92 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Outside Employment/Casting Policies  

During the first year, students will fulfill their production requirement (performance: THEA 140, 141; 
production: PROD 100, 101) by working at the Pittsburgh Playhouse of Point Park University in order to learn 
the operations of the theatre and to provide crew support for all productions. Freshmen must be available for 
crew during all production class times throughout the term.  

All students may seek outside employment/casting opportunities when such opportunities do not conflict 
with classes, departmental rehearsals, performances, or production class requirements. All outside employment 
must be approved by the Department Chair. Exceptions may be granted for extraordinary circumstances. A 
student seeking an exception must follow procedures as described in the Outside Employment policies in the 
theatre student handbook before making any commitments and secure permission from the Department Chair. 

Departmental Casting Policies  

To  be  cast  in  a  Conservatory  Theatre  Company  show,  the  following  courses  must  be  successfully 

completed:  
B.F.A. Acting: THEA 101, 102, 104, 105, 114, 115, 116, 140, and 141. 
B.F.A Musical Theatre: THEA 101, 102, 104, 105, 137, 140, 141; MUS 111, 112, 123 and 124; BAL 111 
and 121.  
B.F.A. Theatre Arts: THEA 101, 102, 104, 105, 114, 115, 118, 119, 140, and 141. 

* Exceptions will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the Department Chair in consultation with theatre 
faculty.  

Please note:  

•  First-year students are not eligible for casting in the academic year, either in the program, or through 

outside employment and university clubs.  

•  Students on departmental probation are ineligible for casting.  
•  The theatre program conducts auditions at a professional level. As in the profession, an audition does 

not guarantee a role.  

Bachelor of Fine Arts in Contemporary Theatre Making 

The Bachelor of Fine Arts in Theatre Arts cultivates the multiple talents and interests of creative students 
seeking to self-design a program that immerses them in theatre making, with opportunities for collaborations 
with other Conservatory arts programs. In the tradition of liberal arts education, this program allows flexibility 
and autonomy to study, experience, and integrate a variety of theatrical disciplines and related fields. After two 
years  of  study  in  performance  techniques,  students  may  choose  from  various  areas  of  emphasis  within  the 
Conservatory of Performing Arts to continue their course of study: Directing, Playwriting, Design, Technical 
Production, and Stage Management. Additionally, students have  options to pursue  a minor, double major, 
study abroad and/or complete the degree in three years. 

Program Objectives  
Upon completion of this program, a student will be able to: 
1.  Collaborate with others in the creation of theatre. 
2.  Experiment with dramatic forms and content. 
3.  Situate theatre in historical, cultural, and stylistic contexts.  

93 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Construct a personalized theatre-making technique that can be applied to the creation and production 

of both new and previously published works.  

5.  Use entrepreneurial skills to develop a personal career plan that includes professional materials. 

42 credits  

54 credits 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Theatre Majors 
THEA 225 History of Theatre I - Explore the World 
THEA 226 History of Theatre II - Explore the World 
THEA 290 Contemporary Drama: Plays & Playwrights - Interpret Creative Works 
THEA 292 Introduction to Performance Studies - Appreciate & Apply the Arts 
THEA 470 - Senior Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  
THEA 101 Acting I - 2 credits   
THEA 102 Acting II - 2 credits  
THEA 104 Voice and Speech I (Semester I) - 2 credits  
THEA 105 Voice and Speech II - 2 credits  
THEA 109 Elements of Stagecraft I - 2 credits  
THEA 114 Stage Movement I - 2 credits 
THEA 115 Stage Movement II - 2 credits 
THEA 118 Stage Make-up - 1 credit  
THEA 119 Creativity and the Creative Process - 2 credits 
THEA 140 Production I - 2 credits  
THEA 141 Production II - 2 credits  
THEA 210 Directing I - 3 credits 
THEA 211 Directing II - 3 credits 
THEA 218 Ensemble Lab II - 2 credits 
THEA 219 Ensemble Lab III - 2 credits 
THEA 250 Script Analysis - 2 credits 
THEA 260 Devised Theatre I - 3 credits 
THEA 261 Devised Theatre II - 3 credits 
THEA 270 Improvisation - 2 credits 
THEA 280 Playwriting I - 3 credits 
THEA 281 Playwriting II - 3 credits 
THEA 303 Shakespeare: Page to Stage - 3 credits 
THEA 318 Ensemble Lab IV - 2 credits 
THEA 319 Ensemble Lab V - 2 credits 
THEA 374 Experimental Theatre I - 3 credits 
THEA 403 Professional Seminar - 3 credits  

Self-Directed (23 credits) OR 

Recommended Concentrations below or see listing for Minors:  
Directing (23 credits)  
Choose 8 credits of electives (200, 300, or 400 level) and take the following required courses: 
PROD 124 Fundamentals of Design & Drawing - 3 credits 
PROD 132 Stage Management I - 3 credits  

94 

 
 
 
 
 
THEA 251 Introduction to Dramaturgy - 3 credits 
THEA 307 Directing III - 3 credits  
THEA 308 Directing IV - 3 credits 

Playwriting (23 credits) 
Choose 8 credits of electives (200, 300, or 400 level) and take the following required courses: 
THEA 251 Introduction to Dramaturgy - 3 credits 
THEA 380 Advanced Playwriting Workshop I - 3 credits 
THEA 381 Advanced Playwriting Workshop II - 3 credits 
CINE 170 Introduction to Screenwriting - 3 credits 
ENGL 365 Creative Nonfiction Workshop I - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.F.A. degree  

125 credits  

Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a Major in Acting  

The Bachelor of Fine  Arts in Acting immerses you in both a program and a city endowed with a rich, 
vibrant  theatre  culture.  Distinguished,  artistically  active  faculty  provide you with  an  eight-semester  rigorous 
training program designed to prepare you for a career in the professional theatre. 

Technique  courses  in  Acting,  Voice,  Speech,  and  Movement  are  complemented  by  courses  including 
theatre history, improvisation, text analysis, singing, and professional preparation, with electives such as acting 
for the camera, directing, and playwriting. 

Students experience a steady synthesis of training and practice in our production program through our 
Conservatory  Theatre  Company,  our  student  run  theatre  company,  and  in  student  films  with  our  Cinema 
department. 

Through collaboration with visiting artists in the classroom and production, and a senior showcase in 

New York, we provide opportunities to ensure a solid foundation for your professional career in acting. 

From inception to graduation, the BFA acting program emphasizes your unique talents and teaches you 

how to cultivate and apply techniques that best develop you as a person and actor. 

Program Objectives:  
Upon completion of this program, a student will be able to: 

1.  Demonstrate proficiency, flexibility, and range as an actor. (Effectively analyzing plays and 

characters, putting oneself imaginatively into the circumstances, being believable within the style, 
playing actions, talking, listening, and taking creative risks.) 

2.  Fully utilize vocal and physical skills as means of clear, creative, and effective expression.  
3.  Understand and be conversant with theatre history, styles, and significant theatrical works and 

artists, applying relevant knowledge to the structure of a role. 

4.  Demonstrate the ability to work collaboratively to create a performance (including knowledge of the 
appropriate chain of command, professional expectations, rehearsal skills, spatial awareness, and 
safety). 

5.  Develop and implement a beginning career plan that demonstrates comprehension of the business 

aspects of a career in acting and utilizes effective tools to showcase skills.  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Theatre Majors 
THEA 225 History of Theatre I - Explore the World 

42 credits  

95 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THEA 226 History of Theatre II - Explore the World 
THEA 290 Contemporary Dramatic Literature – Interpret Creative Works  
THEA 292 Introduction to Performance Studies – Apply & Appreciate the Arts 
THEA 400 Senior Showcase - Capstone  

Department Major Requirements  
THEA 101 Acting I - 2 credits 
THEA 102 Acting II - 2 credits 
THEA 104 Voice & Speech I - 2 credits 
THEA 105 Voice & Speech II - 2 credits 
THEA 109 Elements of Stagecraft I - 2 credits 
THEA 114 Stage Movement I - 2 credits 
THEA 115 Stage Movement II - 2 credits 
THEA 116 Principles of Singing I - 1 credit  
THEA 117 Principles of Singing II - 1 credit 
THEA 118 Stage Makeup - 1 credit 
THEA 140 Production I - 2 credits 
THEA 141 Production II - 2 credits 
THEA 205 Acting III - 2 credits 
THEA 206 Acting IV - 2 credits 
THEA 207 Stage Movement III - 2 credits 
THEA 208 Stage Movement IV - 2 credits 
THEA 213 Voice & Speech III - 2 credits 
THEA 214 Voice & Speech IV - 2 credits 
THEA 223 Studio I - 2 credits  
THEA 224 Studio II - 2 credits 
THEA 250 Script Analysis - 2 credits 
THEA 270 Improvisation for the Actor - 2 credits 
THEA 301 Acting V - 2 credits 
THEA 302 Acting VI - 2 credits 
THEA 304 Voice & Speech V - 2 credits 
THEA 305 Voice & Speech VI - 2 credits 
THEA 311 Stage Movement V - 2 credits 
THEA 312 Stage Movement VI - 2 credits 
THEA 323 Studio III - 2 credits 
THEA 324 Studio IV - 2 credits 
THEA 403 Professional Seminar - 3 credits 
THEA 411 Stage Movement VII - 2 credits 
THEA 412 Stage Movement VIII - 2 credits 
THEA 413 Voice & Speech VII - 2 credits 
THEA 414 Voice & Speech VIII - 2 credits 
THEA 415 Acting VII - 2 credits 
THEA 416 Acting VIII - 2 credits 
THEA 423 Studio V - 2 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.F.A degree in Acting 

74 credits  

5 credits 
121 credits 

96 

 
 
 
Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a Major in Musical Theatre 

Program Objectives:  
Upon completion of this program, a student will be able to: 

1.  PERFORMANCE: Demonstrate the requisite technical skills as a musical theatre actor 

including Acting, Voice Production, and Dance and exhibit the ability to perform various styles 
with continued growth and artistry.  

2.  MUSIC PROFICIENCY: Develop and apply the basic musical skills including sight-singing, 

musicianship, music theory, and piano. 

3.  STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS: Break down text as it applied to scripts and scores for the musical 

theatre actor. 

4.  PROFESSIONAL PREPARATION: Develop repertory and techniques for auditions. Design a 

personal career plan to generate work in the theatre and showcase skills 

5.  HISTORICAL STUDIES: Understand the fundamentals of theatre history and how the 

historical, political, economic, and cultural contexts relate to theatrical styles. 

6.  COMMUNICATION AND COLLABORATION: Practice the collaborative process of theatre. 

Employ the skills necessary to communicate and collaborate in the artistic process.  

42 credits  

69 credits 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Theatre Majors 
THEA 225 History of Theatre I - Explore the World 
THEA 226 History of Theatre II - Explore the World 
THEA 400 Senior Showcase - Capstone  

Musical Theatre 
MUS 111 Private Voice I - 1 credit 
MUS 112 Private Voice II - 1 credit 
MUS 123 Music Theory/Piano/Sight Singing I - 2 credits 
MUS 124 Music Theory/Piano/Sight Singing II - 2 credits 
MUS 211 Private Voice III - 1 credit 
MUS 212 Private Voice IV - 1 credit 
MUS 223 Ensemble Singing I - 2 credits  
MUS 224 Ensemble Singing II - 2 credits 
MUS 311 Private Voice V - 1 credit 
MUS 312 Private Voice VI - 1 credit 
MUS 411 Private Voice VII - 1 credit 
MUS 412 Private Voice VIII - 1 credit 
THEA 101 Acting I - 2 credits 
THEA 102 Acting II - 2 credits 
THEA 104 Voice & Speech I - 2 credits 
THEA 105 Voice & Speech II - 2 credits 
THEA 109 Stagecraft - 2 credits 
THEA 137 Script Analysis for Musical Theatre - 2 credits 
THEA 138 Survey of Musical Theatre - 2 credit 

97 

 
 
 
 
 
 
THEA 140 Production I - 2 credits 
THEA 141 Production II - 2 credits 
THEA 205 Acting III - 2 credits 
THEA 206 Acting IV - 2 credits 
THEA 213 Voice & Speech III - 2 credits 
THEA 214 Voice & Speech IV - 2 credits 
THEA 237 Acting Through Song I - 2 credits 
THEA 238 Acting Through Song II - 2 credits 
THEA 301 Acting V - 2 credits 
THEA 304 Voice & Speech V - 2 credits 
THEA 321 Repertoire - 2 credits 
THEA 322 Junior Musical Theatre Lab - 4 credits 
THEA 337 Acting Through Song III - 2 credits 
THEA 338 Acting Through Song IV - 2 credits 
THEA 403 Professional Seminar - 3 credits  
THEA 409 Advanced Topics in Musical Theatre - 2 credits 
THEA 437 Acting Through Song V - 2 credits 
THEA 438 Acting Through Song VI - 2 credits 

Dance Technique Requirements 
BAL 111 Classical Ballet I - 3 credits  
BAL 121 Classical Ballet II - 3 credits  
DANC 105 Tap Dance I - 2 semesters, 1 credit each 
JAZ 101 Supplemental Jazz I - 1 credit 
JAZ 102 Supplemental Jazz II - 1 credit 
JAZ 201 Supplemental Jazz III - 2 semesters, 1 credit each 
JAZ 202 Supplemental Jazz IV - 2 semesters, 1 credit each 
MOD 101 Supplemental Modern I - 1 credit 
MOD 102 Supplemental Modern II - 1 credit 

16 credits 

General Electives 
Minimum credits for B.F.A degree in Musical Theatre 

6 credits 
133 credits 

Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a Major in Theatre Production 

The Bachelor of Fine Arts in Theatre Production provides you a breadth of understanding, encourages 
independent thought, and offers high quality of practice in a demanding environment to advance professional 
competence  in  Stage  Management,  Technical  Theatre,  and  Design.  Housed  within  the  Conservatory  of 
Performing Arts, our program is a powerhouse of creativity and opportunity that enables you to gain practical 
experience beginning your first semester and to build a first-rate portfolio. 15+ productions in multiple venues 
are supported by faculty, staff, master teachers, and directors who are all professional artists, technicians, and 
stage managers. 

Program Objectives:  
Upon completion of this program, a student will be able to: 

98 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Demonstrate the foundational skills of a well-rounded working professional in Theatre 

Production, with specific and advanced skills and craft in one discipline of Theatre Production. 

2.  Comprehend business aspects of Theatre: develop a personal career plan and the tools to 

showcase skills and competencies.  

3.  Competently discuss world theatre history, styles, and significant theatrical works and artists as 

a whole, evaluating the role of Theatre Production therein. 

4.  Contribute to a collaborative artistic environment through articulate and clear oral and written 

communication skills. 

5.  Enlist and create innovative systems to support and promote artistic vision of Theatre, and as 

means to complement Theatre traditions and practices. 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Theatre Majors 
THEA 225 History of Theatre I - Explore the World 
THEA 226 History of Theatre II - Explore the World 
PROD 450 Professional Preparation for Design/Tech - Capstone* OR 

PROD 451 Professional Preparation for SM – Capstone** 

Department Major Requirements  
PROD 110 Production Practicum I - 4 credits*** 
PROD 113 Stage Operations - 2 credits 
PROD 121 Costume Construction I - 2 credits 
PROD 124 Design Fundamentals & Drawing - 3 credits 
PROD 132 Stage Management I - 3 credits 
PROD 140 Theatre Safety - 2 credits 
PROD 142 Drafting and CAD - 3 credits 
PROD 145 Script Analysis - 2 credits 
PROD 210 Production Practicum II - 12 credits*** 
PROD 213 Carpentry for the Theatre - 2 credits 
PROD 224 Scene Painting - 2 credits 
PROD 226 Scene Design I - 3 credits 
PROD 227 Lighting Design I - 3 credits 
PROD 228 Costume Design I - 3 credits 
PROD 229 Audio Design - 2 credits 
PROD 243 The Acting/Directing Process - 3 credits 
PROD 245 Properties I - 2 credits 
PROD 326 Scene Design II - 3 credits 
PROD 327 Lighting Design II - 3 credits 
PROD 328 Costume Design II - 3 credits 
PROD 343 Electricity of the Theatre - 2 credits 
***2 credits each, taken multiple times to fulfill overall credit requirement. 

Technical Design and Management  
PROD 212 Computer Applications for Managers - 3 credits 
PROD 313 Technical Design - 2 credits 
PROD 440 Production Management - 3 credits 
*PROD 450 Professional Preparation for Design Tech - 3 credits 

99 

42 credits  

64 credits  

23 credits 

 
 
 
 
 
Choose one course from the following: 
PROD 346 Theatre Architecture and Décor - 3 credits 
PROD 348 Costume History - 3 credits 

Choose two courses from the following: 
PROD 333 Stage Management II - 3 credits 
PROD 413 Technical Direction - 3 credits 
PROD 426 Scene Design III - 3 credits 
PROD 427 Lighting Design III - 3 credits 
PROD 428 Costume Design III - 3 credits 
PROD 433 AEA & Theatre Unions - 3 credits 

Choose three courses from the following: 
PROD 221 Costume Construction II - 2 credits 
PROD 361 Advanced CAD - 2 credits 
PROD 362 Metalworking - 2 credits 
PROD 363 Automation - 2 credits 
PROD 373 Costume Crafts - 2 credits 
PROD 382 Properties II - 2 credits 
PROD 391 Audio Engineering - 2 credits 
PROD 392 Video Production - 2 credits 
PROD 393 Vectorworks - 2 credits 

Minimum credits for B.F.A degree in Theatre Production  
Technical Design and Management 

Design  
PROD 222 Computer Applications for Designers - 3 credits 
PROD 313 Technical Design - 2 credits 
PROD 346 Theatre Architecture and Décor - 3 credits 
PROD 348 Costume History - 3 credits 
*PROD 450 Professional Preparation for Design Tech - 3 credits 

129 credits 

25 credits  

Choose two courses from the following: 
PROD 413 Technical Direction - 3 credits 
PROD 426 Scene Design III - 3 credits 
PROD 427 Lighting Design III - 3 credits 
PROD 428 Costume Design III - 3 credits 

Choose one course from the following: 
PROD 363 Automation - 2 credits 
PROD 373 Costume Crafts - 2 credits 
PROD 393 Vectorworks - 2 credits 

Choose one course from the following: 
PROD 362 Metalworking - 2 credits 

100 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
131 credits 

18 credits  

PROD 372 Makeup for Production - 2 credits 
PROD 382 Properties II - 2 credits 
PROD 392 Video Production - 2 credits 

Choose two courses from the following: 
PROD 221 Costume Construction II - 2 credits 
PROD 323 Advanced Drawing - 2 credits 
PROD 361 Advanced CAD - 2 credits 
PROD 391 Audio Engineering - 2 credits 

Minimum credits for B.F.A degree in Theatre Production  
Design 

Stage Management  
PROD 212 Computer Applications for Managers - 3 credits 
PROD 333 Stage Management II - 3 credits 
PROD 433 AEA & Theatre Unions - 3 credits 
PROD 440 Production Management - 3 credits 
**PROD 451 Professional Preparation for Stage Managers -3 credits 

Choose one course from the following: 
PROD 372 Makeup for Production - 2 credits 
PROD 381 Reading Music - 2 credits 
PROD 382 Properties II - 2 credits 
PROD 383 Stage Movement for Stage Managers - 2 credits 
PROD 391 Audio Engineering - 2 credits 

Choose two courses from the following: 
PROD 346 Theatre Architecture & Decor - 3 credits 
PROD 348 Costume History - 3 credits 
SAEM 240 Performing Arts Presenting and Touring - 3 credits 
SAEM 330 Talent Booking Management - 3 credits 
SAEM 331 Production Tour Management - 3 credits 
SAEM 420 Producing Commercial and Nonprofit Performing Arts - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.F.A degree in Theatre Production  
with Concentration in Stage Management 
Minors in Conservatory of Performing Arts  

124 credits 

Cinema Studies Minor (18 credits)  
Prerequisites: Minor is open to students from all departments, EXCEPT Cinema & Digital Arts  

Required Courses (9) 
CINE 101 Introduction to Cinema Techniques - 3 credits  
CINE 102 History of American Cinema - 3 credits  
CINE 110 History of International Cinema - 3 credits  

101 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Electives (9)  
CINE 301 Cinema Studies* - 3 credits  

(This course covers various topics, which can include: Five International Masters, Five 
American Masters, Cinema of the 1970’s, Cinema of the 1990’s, French New Wave,  
The Comedy, Shakespeare on Film, and additional courses) 

CINE 302 Cinema Authors* - 3 credits  

(This course covers various filmmakers, which can include: The Coen Brothers, 
Martin Scorsese, Woody Allen, Stanley Kubrick, Steven Spielberg, and additional 
courses)  

CINE 395 or 495 Special Topics - 3 credits  
(Upon instructor approval)  

CINE 499 Independent Study - 3 credits  

(Upon instructor approval)  

Other Requirements  

•  A grade of ‘C’ (2.0) or better is required in all courses used to satisfy the minor.  
•  At least 12 hours must be earned at Point Park University within the department.  
•  No credit by exam may be given.  
• 

Internship credit cannot be used toward the minor.  

* Students cannot choose more than two courses of either CINE 301 or CINE 302  

Choreography Minor (18 credits)  
Prerequisites: (10 credits) 
DANC 109 Elements of Production - 2 credits 
DANC 280 Dance Composition I - 2 credits 
DANC 281 Dance Composition II - 2 credits  
DANC 225 History of Dance II - 3 credits 
DANC 180 Improvisation - 1 credit  

Minor Requirements: (8 credits) 
DANC 300 Choreographic Theory and Practice - 3 credits 
DANC 303 Dance and New Media - 3 credits  
DANC 481 Choreography Project - 2 credits  

Dance Minor (23 credits)  
Prerequisites: (12 credits)  
Artistic Audition and  
BAL 111 Classical Ballet I - 3 credits  
BAL 121 Classical Ballet II - 3 credits  
JAZ 111 Jazz Dance I - 3 credits  
MOD 111 Modern Dance I - 3 credits  

Two courses from: (2 credits)  
DANC 105 Tap Dance I - 1 credit  

102 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DANC 106 Cultural Dance Forms - 1 credit  
DANC 107 Character Dance I - 1 credit  
DANC 180 Improvisation - 1 credit 

One to three courses from: (3 credits)  
BAL 171 Classical Ballet Partnering I - 1 credit  
DANC 115 Music Fundamentals for Dancers - 2 credits  
DANC 163 Somatic Prep - 1 credit  
DANC 236 Contemporary Partnering I - 1 credit  
DANC 280 Dance Composition I - 2 credits  
DANC 224 History of Dance I - 3 credits  

Choose one emphasis from: (6 credits)  
Ballet  
BAL 211 Classical Ballet III - 3 credits  
BAL 221 Classical Ballet IV - 3 credits  
Modern  
MOD 121 Modern Dance II - 3 credits  
MOD 211 Modern Dance III - 3 credits  
Jazz  
JAZ 121 Jazz Dance II - 3 credits  
JAZ 211 Jazz Dance III - 3 credits  
Hip Hop 
HHP 111 Hip Hop I - 3 credits 
HHP 121 Hip Hop II - 3 credits 

Applied Music Minor (for Musical Theatre Majors Only) (18 credits)  
*No longer offered starting in Fall 2025.  

Applied Music Minor (for Non-Musical Theatre Majors) (17 credits)  
*No longer offered starting in Fall 2024.  
Musical Theatre Minor for Theatre Arts Majors (23 credits)  
Prerequisites: Audition, Sophomore Standing and THEA 101, 102, 104, 105 

Required  
THEA 116 Principles of Singing I - 1 credit 
BAL 111 Classical Ballet I - 3 credits  
BAL 121 Classical Ballet II - 3 credits  
MUS 111 Private Voice I - 1 credit  
MUS 112 Private Voice II - 1 credit  
MUS 123 Music Theory/Piano/Sight Singing Part I - 2 credit  
MUS 201 University Singers - 2 credits (2 semesters x1 credit each) 
THEA 200 Principles of Acting for Musical Theatre I - 2 credit  
THEA 201 Principles of Acting for Musical Theatre II - 2 credit  
Choose 6 credits: 
JAZ 101 Supplemental Jazz I - 1 credit 

103 

 
 
 
 
 
 
JAZ 102 Supplemental Jazz II - 1 credit 
JAZ 201 Supplemental Jazz III - 1 credit 
JAZ 202 Supplemental Jazz IV - 1 credit 
MOD 101 Supplemental Modern I - 1 credit 
MOD 102 Supplemental Modern II - 1 credit 
DANC 105 Tap Dance I - 1-2 credits (up to 2 semesters, 1 credit each) 

Musical Theatre Minor for Dancers (23 credits)  
Prerequisite: Audition, Freshman Standing (second semester) and BAL 111, JAZ 111 

Required  
BAL 121 Classical Ballet II - 3 credits* 
JAZ 121 Jazz Dance II - 3 credits* 
THEA 116 Principles of Singing I - 1 credit 
MUS 111 Private Voice I - 1 credit  
MUS 112 Private Voice II - 1 credit  
MUS 123 Music Theory/Piano/Sight Singing Part I - 2 credits 
MUS 201 University Singers- 2 credits (2 semesters x1 credit each) 
THEA 200 Principals of Acting for Musical Theatre I - 2 credits 
THEA 201 Principals of Acting for Musical Theatre II - 2 credits 
THEA 111 Introduction to Acting I - 3 credits 
THEA 112 Introduction to Acting II - 3 credits 

*These courses are already required for the major and do not need to be repeated. 

Screenwriting Minor (18 credits) 
Required (9) 
CINE 105 Introduction to Screenwriting - 3 credits 
CINE 205 Narrative Structure - 3 credits 
CINE 305 Intermediate Screenwriting - 3 credits 

Choose three from: (9) 
CINE 306 Story Analysis - 3 credits 
CINE 308 History of TV Entertainment - 1936-2000 - 3 credits 
CINE 326 Acting and Directing for Writers and Filmmakers - 3 credits 
CINE 361 Writing for Theatre - 3 credits 
CINE 362 Writing the Situational Comedy - 3 credits 
CINE 363 Writing the One Hour Drama - 3 credits 
CINE 364 Writing for Multimedia - 3 credits 
CINE 365 Writing the Adaptation - 3 credits 
CINE 367 Writing for Video Games - 3 credits 
CINE 368 Writing for TV Animation - 3 credits 
CINE 405 Advanced Screenwriting I - 3 credits 
CINE 406 Advanced Screenwriting II - 3 credits 
CINE395 or 495 Special Topics (upon instructor approval) - 3 credits 
CINE 499 Independent Study (upon instructor approval) - 3 credits 

104 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Requirements  

•  A grade of ‘C’ (2.0) or better is required in all courses used to satisfy the minor.  
•  At least 12 hours must be earned at Point Park University within the department.  
•  No credit by exam may be given. 
• 

Internship credit cannot be used toward the minor.  

Stage Management Minor (24 credits)  
Prerequisites: Interview with the Coordinator of Theatre Production 

Required (21) 
PROD 110 Two Practicum Courses (as ASM or SM) - 4 credits (Taken twice, 2 credits each) 
PROD 113 Stage Operations - 2 credits  
PROD 124 Fundamentals of Design and Drawing - 3 credits  
PROD 132 Stage Management I - 3 credits  
PROD 142 Drafting and CAD - 3 credits  
PROD 227 Lighting I - 3 credits  
PROD 333 Stage Management II - 3 credits 

Choose one from: (3) 
THEA 101 Acting I - 3 credits  
PROD 243 The Acting/Directing Process - 3 credits 

Technical Theatre/Design Minor (20-24 credits)  
Required (12) 
PROD 110 Production Practicum I - 4 credits (Taken twice, 2 credits each) 
PROD 113 Stage Operations - 2 credits  
PROD 124 Fundamentals of Design and Drawing - 3 credits  
PROD 132 Stage Management I - 3 credits  

Choose two from: (4-9) 
PROD 142 Drafting and CAD - 3 credits  
PROD 224 Scene Painting - 2 credits 
PROD 226 Scene Design I - 3 credits  
PROD 227 Lighting I - 3 credits  
PROD 228 Costume Design I - 3 credits  
PROD 229 Audio Design - 2 credits 
PROD 245 Properties I - 2 credits 

Choose one from: (2-3) 
PROD 313 Technical Design - 2 credits 
PROD 326 Scene Design II - 3 credits 
PROD 327 Lighting Design II - 3 credits 
PROD 328 Costume Design II - 3 credits 

Choose one from: (2-3) 

105 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROD 121 Costume Construction I - 2 credits 
PROD 213 Carpentry for the Theatre - 2 credits 
PROD 343 Electricity of the Theatre - 2 credits 
PROD 440 Production Management - 3 credits 

Theatrical Engineering Minor (21 credits) 
Prerequisites and Co-Requisites for the minor: TE  101, THEA 225, THEA 226, THEA 230  

Required 
PROD 110 Production Practicum I - 4 credits (Taken twice, 2 credits each) 
PROD 124 Fundamentals of Design and Drawing - 3 credits 
PROD 226 Scene Design I - 3 credits 
PROD 227 Lighting I - 3 credits 
PROD 229 Audio Design - 2 credits 
TE 401 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering I - 3 credits 
TE 402 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering II - 3 credits 

Graduate Studies  

The Film and Animation Department offers a graduate degree in a Master of Fine Arts in Writing 
for the Screen and Stage. For a graduate catalog or information, visit the website or please call the Office of 
Graduate Admission at (412) 392-3808. 

Dance BFA/Master of Education in PreK-4th Certification Stacked Program 

The Department of Dance is partnering with the School of Education to bring a new program. This 

will allow Dance students the chance to earn credits toward a Pennsylvania teaching certification while also 
completing their B.F.A. For more information and how to apply, visit BFA/M.Ed. information.  

106 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School of Arts and Sciences 
Becky Spritz, Ph.D., Dean 

The School of Arts and Sciences is home to the departments of Criminal Justice and Intelligence 
Studies;  Literature,  Culture,  and  Society;  Natural  Sciences  and  Engineering;  and  Psychology. The 
mission  of  the  School  of  Arts  and  Sciences  is  to  prepare  students  for  future  careers,  advanced 
education,  and  life-long  leaning  by  educating  and  developing  skills  that  have  both  academic  and 
practical  application.  We  aim  to  expose  students  to  the  diversity  of  our  global  cultures,  creating 
citizens who can impact society in positive ways by making well-informed and educated decisions. The 
School of Arts and Sciences offers students hands-on opportunities, through internships, co-ops, and 
job  shadowing,  to  reinforce  in-class  learning.  The  faculty  in  Arts  and  Sciences  aim  to  nourish 
independent-thinking, professionalism, originality, and integrity in scholarship. 

Department of Literature, Culture, and Society 
B.A. - English 
B.A. - Creative Writing 
B.A. - History 
B.A./B. S. - Interdisciplinary Studies 
B.A. - International and Environmental Studies 
B.A. - Legal Studies 
B.A./B.S. - Liberal Studies with an Elected Area of Concentration 
B.A. - Political Science 
B.A. -  Social Justice Studies 

Department of Psychology 
B.A. - Behavioral Sciences 
B.A. - Psychology 
B.A./M. A. - Psychology (4+1 Program) 

Department of Natural Sciences and Engineering  
B.S. - Entertainment Production Engineering 
B.S. - Biological Sciences 
B.S. - Civil Engineering  
B.S. - Electrical Engineering 
B.S. - Mechanical Engineering 
B.S. - Funeral Service 
B.S. - Funeral Service - Capstone 

Department of Criminal Justice and Intelligence Studies 
B.S. - Criminal Justice 
B.S. - Forensic Science 
B.S. - Intelligence and National Security 

107 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Department of Literature, Culture, and Society 
Professors: Karen Dwyer, Ph.D.; J. Dwight Hines, Ph.D.; Edward Meena, M.Ed., M.A.; Robert Ross, Ph.D. 
Associate Professors: Christopher Girman, Ph.D.; Marion Dixon, Ph.D.; Kirstin Hanley, Ph.D. (Chair); 
Jessica McCort, Ph.D., Dora Ion, Ph.D. 
Professor Emeritus/Emerita: Amy Kim Bell, M.A.; Portia K. Weston, Ed.D. 

The Department of Literature, Culture, and Society casts a wide net: students interested in writing, politics, 
sociology,  law,  history,  and  philosophy  are  drawn  together  to  share,  learn,  and  inspire  each  other.    These 
programs appeal to students who like to question, probe, and challenge.  A humanities degree prepares students 
for a career field or for an advanced degree. 

All Literature, Culture, and Society students are required to achieve minimum proficiency in writing prior 
to completing their degree.  This means that each student must receive a grade of a “C” or better in ENGL 
101.    Students  not  meeting  this  requirement  will  be  required  to  repeat  the  course  to  improve  their  grade.  
Supplemental instructional support through writing studio courses is available to all students.    

English  
The program leading to a Bachelor of Arts degree with a major in English is directed toward two objectives: (a) 
the understanding of literary works of the past and present in an effort to extend the student’s knowledge of 
human thought, emotion, and experience and (b) the development of those skills necessary to communicate 
effectively, persuasively, clearly, and concisely through both the written and spoken word. The major in English 
requires a total of 120 credits.  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in English  

Program Objectives  

In order to advance in their professions and serve their communities through a mastery of critical thinking, clear, logical 
written and oral communication, and the ability to think creatively and collaboratively within diverse cultural, historical, 
and theoretical contexts, students will pursue the following goals: 

Students upon completion of a B.A. in English will be able to: 

1. Interpret, analyze, and evaluate literary texts. 
2. Analyze texts within global, cultural, historical, or theoretical contexts. 
3. Identify and explain multiple literary genres, such as poetry, fiction, drama, and nonfiction prose. 
4. Write three or more of the following: 

a. Argument, 
b. Literary Analysis, 
c. Research, 
d. Exposition, 
e. Poetry, fiction, or creative nonfiction, 
f. Meta-cognitive or reflective writing.  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
ENGL 419 Senior Capstone for the English Major 

42 credits  

108 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
Department Major Requirements  
Humanities Requirement (12) 
Students must complete 12 credits of coursework in Social Justice Studies, Philosophy, Psychology,   
Sociology, Behavioral Science, History, Political Science, Modern Languages, or Global Cultural  
Studies.  9 of the 12 credits must be taken at the 200-level (or higher).   
At least two different fields of study must be represented. 

57 credits 

Language Sequence (9)  
Must include a minimum of a two semester sequence in the same foreign  
language (courses in translation excluded) - 9 credits  

Literary Arts Requirements 
ENGL 252, 253, 254 OR 255 - 3 credits 
ENGL 260, 261, 262 OR 263 - 3 credits 
ENGL 335 History of the English Language OR 
         ENGL 302 Linguistics - 3 credits 
ENGL 338 Literary Criticism - 3 credits 

Exploring Literacy Traditions (24)  
Choose eight courses: 5 of 6 themes must be represented.  3 credits may be at the 200-level. 
Theme 1: Surveys 
ENGL 120 Introduction to Literary Studies - 3 credits 
ENGL 250 World Literature: Drama, Poetry - 3 credits 
ENGL 251 World Literature: Novels - 3 credits 
ENGL 252 The Art of Creative Nonfiction - 3 credits  
ENGL 253 The Art of Poetry - 3 credits  
ENGL 254 The Art of the Short Story - 3 credits  
ENGL 255 Theoretical Approaches to the Study of Literature - 3 credits  
ENGL 260 British Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 261 British Literature II - 3 credits 
ENGL 262 American Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 263 American Literature II - 3 credits 
Theme 2: Topics 
ENGL 300 Topics 1 - 3 credits 
ENGL 301 Topics 2 - 3 credits 
Theme 3: Authors 
ENGL 305 Authors 1 - 3 credits 
ENGL 306 Authors 2 - 3 credits  
Theme 4: Language and Theory 
ENGL 302 Linguistics - 3 credits 
ENGL 315 Language and Theory 1 - 3 credits  
ENGL 316 Language and Theory 2 - 3 credits  
ENGL 335 History of the English Language - 3 credits 
Theme 5: Historical Period and Traditions  
ENGL 340 Periods and Traditions 1 - 3 credits 
ENGL 341 Periods and Traditions 2 - 3 credits 
ENGL 342 Periods and Traditions 3 - 3 credits 

109 

 
 
 
 
ENGL 343 Periods and Traditions 4 - 3 credits 
ENGL 344 Periods and Traditions 5 - 3 credits 
Theme 6: Creative Writing 
ENGL 200 Creative Writing - 3 credits 
ENGL 365 Creative Nonfiction Workshop 1 - 3 credits  
ENGL 366 Fiction Workshop 1 - 3 credits  
ENGL 367 Poetry Workshop 1 - 3 credits  
ENGL 401 Nonfiction Workshop 2 - 3 credits  
ENGL 402 Nonfiction Workshop 3 - 3 credits  
ENGL 403 Fiction Workshop 2 - 3 credits  
ENGL 404 Fiction Workshop 3 - 3 credits  
ENGL 405 Poetry Workshop 2 - 3 credits  
ENGL 406 Poetry Workshop 3 - 3 credits  
ENGL 411 Creative Nonfiction Workshop 4 - 3 credits 
ENGL 412 Fiction Workshop 4 - 3 credits 
ENGL 413 Poetry Workshop 4 - 3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

Creative Writing  

21 credits  
120 credits  

Creative Writing offers an opportunity for students with a passion for literature and the arts to develop 

their interest in writing through hands-on workshop classes and literary seminars.  

Students pursuing the major in Creative Writing will complete a series of workshop courses intended to 
help them focus on practicing and refining their craft.  Creative Writing students will also take a slate of broad-
ranging and diverse literature courses so that they may constantly be engaging with the life of a literary text 
from the first draft’s raw inspiration to the published work’s ongoing vitality.   

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Creative Writing  

Program Objective  

1.  Assess the technique of literary texts, attending to both writerly and readerly concerns, in order to 

2. 

demonstrate an understanding of craft as an analytical subject. (Craft)  
Identify major genres, traditions, themes, forms, and periods or movements in literature and the arts 
and reflect an understanding of those genres’ conventions. (Genres)  

3.  Write and revise texts in at least two genres emphasizing the integrity of the workshop process, the 
necessity of revision and editing, and the ongoing vitality of the text outside of the author’s original 
intention. (Write/Revise)  

4.  Examine, identify, and adopt aesthetic principles based on study of model texts, workshop texts, and 
their own writing and place their own work within a larger tradition. (Aesthetic Development)  
5.  Compose a portfolio of work demonstrating their development as writers and critical thinkers 

working to master the Creative Writing program’s essential skills and values, including craft and the 
recursive nature of the creative process. (Synthesis)  

Core Requirements  

42 credits  

110 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
ENGL 200 Creative Writing - Apply and Appreciate the Arts (recommended) 
ENGL 420 Senior Seminar: Craft and Critique - Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  
Humanities Requirement (12) 
Students must complete 12 credits of coursework in Social Justice Studies, Philosophy, Psychology,   
Sociology, Behavioral Science, History, Political Science, Modern Languages, or Global Cultural  
Studies.  9 of the 12 credits must be taken at the 200-level (or higher).   
At least two different fields of study must be represented. 

57 credits 

Language Sequence (9)  
Must include a minimum of a two semester sequence in the same foreign  
language (courses in translation excluded) - 12 credits  

Literary Arts Requirements (18) 
ENGL 365 Creative Nonfiction Workshop 1 - 3 credits  
ENGL 366 Fiction Workshop 1 - 3 credits  
ENGL 367 Poetry Workshop 1 - 3 credits  
Select 3 different advanced workshops: 
ENLG 401/402/411 Creative Nonfiction Workshop 2, 3, or 4 - 3 credits 
ENGL 403/404/412 Fiction Workshop 2, 3, or 4 - 3 credits 
ENGL 405/406/413 Poetry Workshop 2, 3, or 4 - 3 credits 

Exploring Literacy Traditions (18)  
Choose six courses: 5 of 6 themes must be represented.  3 credits may be at the 200-level. 
Theme 1: Surveys 
ENGL 200 Creative Writing - 3 credits 
ENGL 250 World Literature: Drama, Poetry, Epic - 3 credits 
ENGL 251 World Literature: Novels - 3 credits 
ENGL 252 The Art of Creative Nonfiction - 3 credits  
ENGL 253 The Art of Poetry - 3 credits  
ENGL 254 The Art of Short Story - 3 credits  
ENGL 255 Theoretical Approaches to the Study of Literature - 3 credits  
ENGL 260 British Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 261 British Literature II - 3 credits 
ENGL 262 American Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 263 American Literature II - 3 credits 
Theme 2: Topics 
ENGL 300 Topics 1 - 3 credits 
ENGL 301 Topics 2 - 3 credits 
Theme 3: Authors 
ENGL 305 Authors 1 - 3 credits 
ENGL 306 Authors 2 - 3 credits  
Theme 4: Language and Theory 
ENGL 302 Linguistics - 3 credits 
ENGL 315 Language and Theory 1 - 3 credits  

111 

 
  
 
 
 
ENGL 316 Language and Theory 2 - 3 credits  
ENGL 335 History of the English Language - 3 credits 
ENGL 338 Literary Criticism - 3 credits 
Theme 5: Historical Period and Traditions  
ENGL 340 Periods and Traditions 1 - 3 credits 
ENGL 341 Periods and Traditions 2 - 3 credits 
ENGL 342 Periods and Traditions 3 - 3 credits 
ENGL 343 Periods and Traditions 4 - 3 credits 
ENGL 344 Periods and Traditions 5 - 3 credits 
Theme 6: Creative Writing 
ENGL 401 Creative Nonfiction Workshop 2 - 3 credits  
ENGL 402 Creative Nonfiction Workshop 3 - 3 credits  
ENGL 403 Fiction Workshop 2 - 3 credits  
ENGL 404 Fiction Workshop 3 - 3 credits  
ENGL 405 Poetry Workshop 2 - 3 credits  
ENGL 406 Poetry Workshop 3 - 3 credits  
ENGL 411 Creative Nonfiction Workshop 4 - 3 credits 
ENGL 412 Fiction Workshop 4 - 3 credits 
ENGL 413 Poetry Workshop 4 - 3 credits 

General Electives   
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

21 credits  
120 credits  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Global Cultural Studies*  
*No longer accepting new applications as of FALL 2024 

History 

History  offers  students  an  opportunity  to  dive  deep  into  the  content  and  methodology  of  historical 
scholarship.  The  coursework  allows  students  to  think  critically  and  analyze  events  in  the  past  to  better 
understand the continuing debates in the modern world. To prepare students for careers as historians, curators, 
archivists,  conservationists,  librarians,  information  retrieval  specialists,  journalists,  and  teachers,  the 
department offers a major in History leading to the Bachelor of Arts degree. This program requires 39 credits 
in history and related disciplines with concentrations offered in two areas of study: United States History and 
World History.  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in History  

Program Objectives  

Identify and explain historical events and chronology in more than one geographic region. 

1. 
2.  Define accepted vocabulary in the field of history and analyze its importance in historical context. 
3.  Analyze how historical change has impacted political, economic, socio-cultural, and environmental 

contexts. 

4.  Understand and analyze the various types of sources used by historians. 

112 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.  Synthesize and effectively communicate knowledge of history in written and oral formats. 

42 credits  

48 credits  

18 credits  

30 credits  

Core Requirements 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
POLS 412 Seminar in History and Political Science - Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  

General Requirements  
POLS 102 American National Government  

OR POLS 250 Intro to Politics - 3 credits 

HIST 202 Western Civilization II - 3 credits  
HIST 204 History of US II - 3 credits 
POLS 205 World Geography - 3 credits 
GCS 215 Modernity, Colonialism, Capitalism - 3 credits 
GCS/SOC 355 Revolutions - 3 credits 

Major Electives  
Group 1 - United States History (Select 4)   12 credits  
HIST 362 American Decades-Topics - 3credits 
HIST 372 History of the American Revolution - 3 credits  
HIST 373 Old South, Civil War and Reconstruction - 3 credits  
HIST 382 History of Pennsylvania: Focus on Pittsburgh - 3 credits 
HIST 295, 395, 495 Special Topics in History - 3 credits  
HIST 455 History Practicum - 3 credits  
POLS 335 American Foreign Policy - 3 credits 

12 credits  

Group 2 - World History (Select 4) 
HIST 255 Military Culture - 3 credits 
HIST 327 Twentieth Century Europe OR HIST 355 WWII - 3 credits 
HIST 337 Hitler and Nazism - 3 credits  
HIST 418 History of Money - 3 credits 
HIST 296, 396, 496 Special Topics in History - 3 credits  
POLS 350 Nationalism - 3 credits 
POLS 358 Palestine/Israel: Politics, History, and Geography - 3 credits 
POLS 380 - Global Governance - 3 credits 
SJS 240 South African Anti-Apartheid Movement - 3 credits 

6 credits  

Group 3 – Arts and Culture (Select 2)  
DANC 224 History of Dance I - 3 credits 
DANC 225 History of Dance II - 3 credits 
ENGL 355 History of English Language - 3 credits 
HIST 220 History of American Music - 3 credits 
SJS 225 Intro to Grant Writing - 3 credits 
THEA 225 History of Theatre I - 3 credits 
THEA 226 History of Theatre II - 3 credits 

113 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

Interdisciplinary Studies 

30 credits  
120 credits 

The Interdisciplinary Studies major is for students who wish to combine two areas of concentration into 
a single degree program. The chosen disciplines must be academic majors or minors at Point Park university, 
or  a  combination  of  related  concentrations  may  count  as  one  discipline  (e.g.,  journalism/communication, 
English/creative writing). At the conclusion of study, each Interdisciplinary Studies major will gain practical 
experience in or related to one or both of their fields of study. The result is a degree that offers the unique 
advantage of interdisciplinarity while working closely with individual advisors. 

Bachelor of Arts/Sciences Degree with Interdisciplinary Studies 

Program Objectives  

1.  Demonstrate understanding of the major arguments, ideas, and literacy tools of the two chosen 

academic disciplines. 

2.  Synthesize the perspectives and analytical tools of at least one of the two disciplines (as outlined in 
your proposal) into a practice that addresses both traditional academic study and the acquisition of 
practical professional skills. 

3.  Collaborate with a variety of individuals from varied academic disciplines, and create professional 

applications that are applicable to one chosen academic discipline. 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
HUMA 405 HUMA - Senior Capstone 

OR HUMA 496 Senior Seminar Thesis Project 

42 credits  

Department Major Requirements  

48 credits  

Students choose two disciplines in consultation with their faculty advisor, with 24 credits required in 
each—12 courses at the lower level and 12 at the upper level. The chosen disciplines must be academic majors 
or minors at this university or (in consultation with the faculty advisor and academic advisor), a combination 
of related majors/minors/concentrations may count as one discipline (ex: journalism/communication; 
English/creative writing; theater/dance). 
Discipline 1 - 24 credits  
Discipline 2 - 24 credits  

General Electives  

Minimum credits for B.A./B.S. degree  

30 credits  

120 credits  

International and Environmental Studies 

The International and Environmental Studies program addresses 21st century social and environmental 
phenomena and problems. Students will become equipped with international, interdisciplinary perspectives to 

114 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understand and address social and environmental issues that cross borders. Students will study both themes--
International Studies and Environmental Studies--and will have  an  opportunity to  focus on one  or both  of 
them in their capstone.  

Bachelor of Arts Degree in International and Environmental Studies 

Program Objectives  

1.  Explain main ideas and theories of/related to International Studies. 
2.  Explain main ideas and theories of/related to Environmental Studies. 
3.  Analyze the intersections of global, national, and local processes. 
4.  Develop a research paper that applies key ideas and theories from International Studies and/or 

Environmental Studies to empirical observations. 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
INES 425 Practicum - Capstone 

OR INES 426 Senior Thesis - Capstone 

42 credits  

Department Major Requirements  

48 credits  

Foundations (9) 
INES 175 Introduction to International Studies - 3 credits  
POLS 205 World Geography - 3 credits  
POLS 250 Introduction to Politics - 3 credits  

Global Political Economy (6) 
HIST 418 The History of Money - 3 credits  
INES 325 Global Political Economy - 3 credits  

Environmental Studies Theme (12) 
INES 210 Global Climate Politics - 3 credits  
INES 305 Cocaine, Coffee, Chocolate - 3 credits  
INES 340 Global Political Ecology - 3 credits  
SOC 203 Spaceship Earth: Intro to Environmental Studies - 3 credits  

International Studies in Action Theme (15) 
INES 240 South African Anti-Apartheid Movement - 3 credits  
INES 260 Economic Tools for Advocacy - 3 credits  
INES 300 Gentrification - 3 credits  
POLS 290 Human Rights in Theory and Practice - 3 credits  
POLS 358 Palestine/Israel: Politics, History, and Geography - 3 credits  

Choose Two (6): 
INES 390 Study Abroad I - 3 credits 
POLS 350 Nationalism - 3 credits 
POLS 380 Global Governance: International Organizations and Politics - 3 credits 

115 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Electives*  
*Recommended: Any 200+ HIST course  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

Legal Studies  

30 credits 

120 credits  

The Legal Studies program is a four-year program for traditional students as well as transfer students who 
bring to Point Park a wide range of credits. The program provides a solid cosmopolitan liberal arts foundation 
for pursuing law school. It focuses upon critical thinking, logical argumentation, the interpretation of complex 
issues as well as the fundamental principles that animate the life of a Democratic society.  This Liberal Arts 
program seeks to promote depth, history, ethics, judgment, theories of justice, administrative complexity and 
social reality in preparing students to engage fully in the manner in which the law, and its institutions, underlie 
the strength of a Democratic society.  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Legal Studies  

Program Objectives  

1.  Examine how the politics of race, class, gender, or nationality have shaped legal institutions and 

outcomes, and how legal institutions affect diverse populations. 

2.  Analyze the policy-making process, the roles of law in society, including how law shapes—and is 

shaped by—social, economic, cultural, and political life. 

3.  Appraise how international, national, state, and local laws and procedures apply to a variety of 

political and social issues or legal disputes. 

4.  Analyze the relationship among case facts, statutory law, case law, and constitutional principles 

involved in specific legal disputes. 

5.  Develop original work (written and/or oral) using the methods and arguments specific to the 

discipline. 

42 credits  

48 credits 

33 credits 

Core Requirements  
POLS 412 Seminar in History and Political Science - Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  

Department General Requirements  
PHIL 100+ 
HIST 202 Western Civilization II OR HIST 373 OR SOC 309 - 3 credits 
POLS 102 American National Government OR POLS 250 Intro to Politics - 3 credits  
Foundations: 
CRMJ 150 Intro to Criminal Justice - 3 credits 
POLS 209 Law and Society - 3 credits  
POLS 215 Introduction to the American Legal System - 3 credits  
POLS 276 Political Theory - 3 credits 
POLS 290 Human Rights in Theory and Practice - 3 credits 
POLS 300 Legal Analysis and Writing - 3 credits 
POLS 402 Constitutional Law - 3 credits  

116 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POLS 408 International Law - 3 credits  

Major Electives 

15 credits 

Select Two of the following:  
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits  
PADM 210 Public Administration - 3 credits  
PADM 303 Public Analysis and Decision Making - 3 credits 
PADM 311 Special Employee Relations in Public Agencies - 3 credits  
POLS 202 State and Local Government - 3 credits 
POLS 207 Public Policy Issues - 3 credits  
**POLS 295, POLS 395 or POLS 495 - 3 credits 

**Must relate to law.  

Select One of the following: 
HIST 418 History of Money - 3credits 
SJS 101 Intro to Social Justice Studies - 3 credits 
SJS 240 South African Anti-Apartheid Movement - 3 credits 
CENG 160 Women’s Studies - 3 credits OR 

CENG 170 LGBTQ Rights - 3 credits OR 
SOCW 309 Soc. of African American Experience - 3 credits OR 
SOCW 350 Sex and Identity Politics - 3 credits 

Select Two of the following: 
CRMJ 261 The Courts and Criminal Trial - 3 credits 
CRMJ 254 Juvenile Justice - 3 credits 
CRMJ 362 Criminal Investigations - 3 credits 
CRMJ 400 Transnational Crime - 3 credits 
POLS 376 Theories of Justice - 3 credits 
POLS 355/356 Internship in Government and Legal Service - 3 credits 

General Electives   
Recommended courses in COMM, CRMJ, HIST, PHIL, SJS, POLS 
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

30 credits  

120 credits  

Liberal Studies  

The Liberal Studies Program offers a four-year program, as well as a program designed for transfer students 
who have a wide range of credits. Both these options feature an “Elected Area of Concentration” designed by 
the  student  and  the  Director  of  Interdisciplinary  Studies  and  Faculty  Advisors.  There  is  also  a  Capstone 
Program  for  students  with  an  Associate’s  Degree  and  a  Post  Baccalaureate  course  of  study  for  those  whose 
career goals have been reached, but who wish to continue with their studies within a structured environment 
tailored to fulfill professional goals. The Capstone and Post Baccalaureate Programs offer options of a designed 
area of concentration, or a concentration in Applied Arts, Public Administration, Information Sciences, or 
International Studies. All Programs lead to a Bachelor of Arts or Science degree grounded in the Liberal Arts 

117 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applied to disciplined areas of concentration. These Programs have special appeal to those seeking a unique 
integrated approach to focused areas of concentration and expertise.  

Bachelor of Arts or Science Degree  
with a major in Liberal Studies and an Elected Area of Concentration  

Program Objectives  

1.  Demonstrate a grounding in the Liberal Arts as the foundation for a unique course of studies based 
on empowering academic and professional fields in a holistic fashion that adds to the application 
and understanding of their studies.  

2.  Be competent in literacy skills and modes of expression used across the board in the Liberal Arts.  
3.  Demonstrate fluency in the Liberal Arts traditional curriculum as the integrated foundation that 

edifies areas of curricular concentration.  

4.  Demonstrate both proficiency and competence in their chosen areas of concentration, utilizing the 
skills demanded of the elected area of concentration in a fashion consistent with the Program 
Objectives of the area of Concentration chosen.  
Identify, articulate, and express literacy in the Liberal Arts at large, and fluency in their 
concentration, in a fashion that focuses their intellect and critical skills toward a discipline. 
Graduates will be competent in Liberal Arts perspectives in general, and in their concentration in 
particular, and be able to identify and demonstrate the intersection and integration of the two.  

5. 

Core Requirements  

Department Major Requirements  

Humanities and Social Sciences  
ENGL 252+ level - 3 credits 
ENGL 300+ level - 3 credits 
HIST course any level - 3 credits  
HIST 300+ - 3 credits  
PHIL 100 or 202+ level - 3 credits  
PSYC 200+ level - 3 credits 
SOC 111 OR INES 175 - 3 credits 
SOC/SOCW/GCS 300+ - 3 credits 

42 credits  

48 credits  

24 credits 

Approved Transfer Credit in the Liberal Arts may be substituted for Department General Requirements.  

Area of Concentration Requirements  
The Program requires 24 Credit Hours in a discipline agreed upon after consultation with the Director of 
Interdisciplinary Studies and Appropriate Faculty Advisor.  Four courses must be at 300+ level. 

24 credits  

Professional Options: 
Applied Arts (24) 

118 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Select eight courses of advisor approved Applied Arts and Integrated Arts courses.  Four courses must be at 
the 300+ level. Courses related to the arts may come from multiple disciplines, including COPA, LCS, 
COMM, or other departments.  

Information Technology (24) 
(Upper-level courses may require prerequisites—consult faculty advisor) 
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - 4 credits 
CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
Select six additional CMPS courses; four must be at the 300+ level 

International Studies (24) 
POLS 207 Public Policy Issues - 3 credits 
POLS 335 American Foreign Policy - 3 credits 
POLS 372 International Relations - 3 credits 
POLS 408 International Law - 3 credits 
Select four additional POLS courses; one must be at the 300+ level 

Public Administration (24) 
PADM 210 Public Administration - 3 credits 
PADM 308 Theories of Public Organization - 3 credits 
Select six additional PADM courses; three courses must be at the 300+ level 

General Electives   
Minimum credits for B.A./B.S. degree  

30 credits  
120 credits  

Political Science  

To meet the needs of students pursuing careers in government, law, journalism, business, education and 
non-profit organizations, the major in Political Science leading to the Bachelor of Arts degree requires both 
lower  and  upper-level  political  science  courses,  along  with  a  concentration  in  one  of  two  areas  of  study: 
Government and Law or World Politics.  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Political Science  

Program Objectives  

1.  Explain the relationship between political institutions and/or systems and legal, social, economic, 

geographic, and cultural dynamics.  

2.  Apply discipline-based knowledge of political institutions and/or systems in order to compare them 

both structurally and in terms of their efficacy in specific contexts. 

3.  Dissect the relations among international political actors, including the roles and functions of 

international organizations and other forms of global governance.  

4.  Evaluate political theories (normative and/or empirical) with different perspectives on power, 

justice, equity, and government.  

5.  Develop high-quality, original work (written and/or oral) using methods and arguments specific to 

the discipline.  

119 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 credits  

48 credits  

Core Requirements  
POLS 412 Seminar in History and Political Science - Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  
SOC 150 Sociological Foundations - 3 credits OR 

SOC 111 World Cultures - 3 credits 

INES 175 Introduction to International Studies - 3 credits OR 

GCS 215 Modernity, Colonialism, and Capitalism - 3 credits 

HIST 204 History of the U.S. II - 3 credits OR  

HIST 202 Western Civilization II - 3 credits OR 
POLS 205 World Geography - 3 credits 

POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits  
POLS 250 Introduction to Politics - 3 credits 
POLS 276 Political Theory - 3 credits 
POLS 372 International Relations - 3 credits  

Choose five courses:  
POLS 207 Public Policy Issues - 3 credits  
POLS 280 Power, Politics, & Society - 3 credits  
POLS 335 American Foreign Policy - 3 credits  
POLS 350 Nationalism - 3 credits 
POLS 358 Palestine/Israel: Political History, and Geography - 3 credits  
POLS 376 Theories of Justice - 3 credits  
POLS 380 Global Gov: IOS and Politics - 3 credits 

Choose a Concentration in Government and Law OR World Politics:  
Government and Law  
Choose four courses:  
PADM 210 Public Administration - 3 credits  
POLS 202 State and Local Government - 3 credits  
POLS 209 Law and Society - 3 credits  
POLS 215 Intro to Legal Studies - 3 credits  
POLS 402 Constitutional Law - 3 credits  
POLS 408 International Law - 3 credits  
POLS 295/395/495 Special Topics - 3 credits 
POLS 355/356 Internship in Government and Legal Service - 3 credits 
SOCW 309 Sociology of the African American Experience - 3 credits OR 

SOCW 350 Sex, Gender, & Identity Politics - 3 credits OR 
CENG 160 Women & Gender Studies - 3 credits OR 
CENG 170 Intro to LGBTQ+ Studies - 3 credits  

World Politics 
Choose four courses:  
INES 325 Global Political Economy - 3 credits 
INES 240 The South African Anti-Apartheid Movement - 3 credits  
INTL 407 World Conflicts -3 credits 
POLS/GCS 290 Human Rights- 3 credits 

120 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POLS 408 International Law - 3 credits 
POLS 295/395/495 Special Topics-3 credits 
POLS 355/356 Internship in Government and Legal Service - 3 credits 
SOC 356 Global Social Change-3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

30 credits  
120 credits  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Social Justice Studies  
        The interdisciplinary major in Social Justice Studies will prepare students to identify social problems, 
recognize a range of potential solutions to those problems, and work toward bringing about those solutions. 

Program Objectives 
1. Articulate major conceptualizations of social justice. 
2. Recognize, in various historical and contemporary cultural texts, iterations of social injustice. 
3. Identify, through classroom and practical experience, the ways in which particular forms of organizing and 
advocacy can be used toward bringing about social justice. 
4. Engage in writing as a tool for social justice advocacy. 
5. Develop an original research project related to social justice. 

42 credits  

60 credits 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
SJS 101 Foundations of Social Justice - Understanding People  
SJS 405 Social Justice Senior Thesis - Capstone  

Department Major Requirements  
Lit Arts Sequence (12) 
At least 9 credits must be at the 200+ level 

Required in SJS Major (12)  
CENG 250 Advocacy and Social Change - 3 credits 
INES 325 Global Political Economy - 3 credits 
SJS 150 Introduction to Cultural Anthropology - 3 credits OR  
         SJS 175 Introduction to Human Geography - 3 credits 
SJS 400 Social Justice and Community Research - 3 credits 

Thematic Studies in Social Justice: 36 credits across three themes. Minimum of 9 credits per theme, no 
more than 15 credits in any one theme. 3 credits may be below 200- level.  

Theme 1: Understanding Injustice 
CINE 302 Cinema Authors: Film and Politics - 3 credits 
SJS 150 Introduction to Cultural Anthropology - 3 credits 
SJS 175 Introduction to Human Geography - 3 credits 
SJS 200 Understanding Injustice I - 3 credits 
SJS 205 Economic Geography - 3 credits 

121 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SJS 222 Anthro of Money - 3 credits  
SJS 300 Understanding Injustice II - 3 credits  
SJS 350 Advanced Social Theory - 3 credits 
SOCW 350 Sex, Gender and Identity Politics - 3 credits 

Theme 2: Articulating Social Justice 
CENG 160 Intro to Women’s & Gender Studies - 3 credits 
CENG 300 Human Rights in Theory and Practice - 3 credits 
CENG 360 Feminist Theory - 3 credits  
INES 240 The South African Anti-Apartheid Movement - 3 credit 
SJS 201 Articulating Social Justice I - 3 credits 
SJS 301 Articulating Social Justice II - 3 credits 
SJS 370 Global Social Justice - 3 credits 

Theme 3: Organizing, Advocacy and Direct Practice 
INES 260 Strike! Boycott! Divest for Social Justice! - 3 credits  
PSYC 348 Psychology of Diversity - 3 credits  
SJS 202 Organizing & Advocacy I - 3 credits 
SJS 203 Direct Practice I - 3 credits 
SJS 225 Introduction to Grant Writing - 3 credits 
SJS 302 Organizing & Advocacy II - 3 credits 
SJS 303 Direct Practice II - 3 credits 
SOCW 326 Social Welfare Policy - 3 credits 

General Electives   
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

18 credits  
120 credits 

Minors in the Literature, Culture, and Society 

English Minor (18 credits) 
Prerequisites:  
ENGL 101 College Composition - 3 credits  

Minor:  
Choose one course: 
ENGL 120 Introduction to Literary Studies - 3 credits 
ENGL 250 World Literature: Drama, Poetry, Epic - 3 credits 
ENGL 251 World Literature: Novels - 3 credits  
ENGL 252 The Art of the Essay - 3 credits 
ENGL 253 The Art of Poetry - 3 credits 
ENGL 254 The Art of the Short Story - 3 credits 
ENGL 255 Theoretical Approaches to the Study of Literature - 3 credits 

Choose one course:  

122 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENGL 260 British Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 261 British Literature II - 3 credits 
ENGL 262 American Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 263 American Literature II - 3 credits 

Choose three courses: 
ENGL literature course (300+ level) 

Choose one course: 
ENGL course (200+level) 

Creative Writing Minor (18 credits) 
Writing Requirements 
Choose five courses: 
ENGL 200 Creative Writing - 3 credits 
ENGL 365 Creative Nonfiction Workshop I - 3 credits 
ENGL 366 Fiction Workshop I - 3 credits 
ENGL 367 Poetry Workshop I - 3 credits 
ENGL 401 Creative Nonfiction Workshop II - 3 credits 
ENGL 402 Creative Nonfiction Workshop III - 3 credits 
ENGL 403 Fiction Workshop II - 3 credits 
ENGL 404 Fiction Workshop III - 3 credits 
ENGL 405 Poetry Workshop II - 3 credits 
ENGL 406 Poetry Workshop III - 3 credits 
ENGL 411 Creative Nonfiction Workshop IV- 3 credits 
ENGL 412 Fiction Workshop IV - 3 credits 
ENGL 413 Poetry Workshop IV - 3 credits 

Literature Requirements 
Choose any (3 credit) course: 
ENGL 252 The Art of Creative Nonfiction - 3 credits 
ENGL 253 The Art of Poetry - 3 credits 
ENGL 254 The Art of the Short Story - 3 credits 
ENGL 255 Approaches to the Study of Literature - 3 credits 
Any 300+ English course - 3 credits 

Social Justice Studies Minor (18 credits) 
SJS 101 Foundations of Social Justice - 3 credits 
SJS 150 OR SJS 175 - 3 credits 
INES 325 OR SJS 350 - 3 credits 
Three additional classes from those listed below - 9 credits 
(One of which must be from Theme 2 AND Theme 3) 
Theme 1: Understanding Injustice 
CINE 302 Cinema Authors: Film and Politics - 3 credits 
SJS 150 Introduction to Cultural Anthropology - 3 credits 
SJS 175 Introduction to Human Geography - 3 credits 

123 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SJS 200 Understanding Injustice I - 3 credits 
SJS 300 Understanding Injustice II - 3 credits 
SJS 350 Advanced Social Theory - 3 credits 
SOCW 350 Sex, Gender and Identity Politics - 3 credits 

Theme 2: Articulating Social Justice 
CENG 300 Human Rights in Theory and Practice - 3 credits 
CENG 360 Feminist Theory - 3 credits 
SJS 201 Articulating Social Justice I - 3 credits 
SJS 301 Articulating Social Justice II - 3 credits 
SJS 370 Global Social Justice - 3 credits 

Theme 3: Organizing, Advocacy and Direct Practice 
INES 260 Strike! Boycott! Divest for Social Justice! - 3 credits 
PSYC 348 Psychology of Diversity - 3 credits 
SJS 202 Organizing & Advocacy I - 3 credits 
SJS 302 Organizing & Advocacy II - 3 credits 
SJS 203 Direct Practice I - 3 credits 
SJS 303 Direct Practice II - 3 credits 
SJS 401 Social Justice Internship - 3 credits 
SOCW 326 Social Welfare Policy - 3 credits 

Global Cultural Studies Minor (18 credits)* 
*No longer offered starting in Fall 2024.  

History Minor (18 credits)  
Eighteen credits in History (200+ level) - 18 credits  

International and Environmental Studies Minor (18 credits) 
INES 175 Introduction to International Studies - 3 credits 
SOC 203 Spaceship Earth: Intro to Environmental Studies - 3 credits 
100-200 Level (Choose 2):   
INES 210 Global Climate Politics - 3 credits 
INES 240 South African Anti-Apartheid Movement - 3 credits 
INES 260 Strike! Boycott! Divest for Social Justice! - 3 credits 
POLS 290 Human Rights - 3 credits 
300-400 Level (Choose 2): 
INES 300 Gentrification - 3 credits 
INES 305 Cocaine, Coffee, Chocolate - 3 credits 
INES 325 Global Political Economy - 3 credits 
INES 340 Global Political Ecology - 3 credits 
POLS 358 Palestine/Israel: Politics, History, & Geography - 3 credits 

Legal Studies Minor (18 credits) 
CRMJ 150 Introduction to Criminal Justice - 3 credits  
POLS 102 American National Government OR 

124 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POLS 250 Introduction to Politics - 3 credits  

Choose any four:  
CRMJ 261 The Courts and Criminal Trial - 3 credits 
POLS 209 Law and Society - 3 credits 
POLS 215 Introduction to the American Legal System - 3 credits 
POLS 207 Public Policy Issues - 3 credits 
POLS 276 Political Theory - 3 credits 
POLS 290 Human Rights in Theory and Practice - 3 credits 
POLS 300 Legal Analysis and Writing - 3 credits 
POLS 402 Constitutional Law - 3 credits 
POLS 408 International Law - 3 credits 
POLS 295/395/495 Special Topics - 3 credits 

Philosophy Minor (18 credits) 
Prerequisite:  
PHIL 100 Introduction to Philosophy - 3 credits  
Minor:  
PHIL 103 Introduction to Logic - 3 credits  
Five additional courses in Philosophy - 15 credits  

Political Science Minor (18 credits)  
Eighteen credits in Political Science (200+ level) - 18 credits  

Sociology Minor (18 credits) 
SOC 150 Sociological Foundations - 3 credits  
SOC 203 Spaceship Earth: Intro to Environmental Studies - 3 credits 
SOC 356 Global Social Change - 3 credits 
Choose one of the following: 
CENG 160 Intro to Women & Gender Studies - 3 credits 
CENG 170 Intro to LGBTQ+ Studies - 3 credits  
INES 240 The South African Anti-Apartheid Movement - 3 credits 
POLS 280 Power, Politics, and Society - 3 credits 
SJS 200 Understanding Injustice-3 credits 
SOCW 202 Social Issues - 3 credits   
Choose two of the following: 
CENG 360 Feminist Theory - 3 credits 
INES 325 Global Political Economy - 3 credits 
POLS 350 Nationalism - 3 credits 
POLS  376 Theories of Justice - 3 credits  
SOCW 309 Sociology of the African American Experience - 3 credits 
SOCW 326 Social Welfare Policy - 3 credits   

125 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Department of Psychology 
Professors: Britney Brinkman, Ph.D.; Robert McInerney, Ph.D.; Brent Dean Robbins Ph.D.; Sarah Schulz, 
Ph.D. (Chair)  
Associate Professors: Bethany Aronson, Ph.D. 
Assistant Professors: Rachel Battaglia PsyD.; Jeremy Northup, Psy.D. 

The Department of Psychology includes bachelor level programs in psychology and behavioral sciences. 

The psychology program includes clinical, child, community, and forensic concentrations.  
        All Psychology and behavioral sciences students are required to achieve minimum proficiency in writing 
prior to completing their degree. Supplemental instructional support through writing studio courses is available 
to all students.   

Behavioral Sciences  

The program, leading to the Bachelor of Arts degree in Behavioral Sciences, provides broad insights into 
the behavior of human beings as individuals, as members of a specific social group, and as citizens of a world 
society. This flexible, interdisciplinary major allows students to take courses in psychology, social work, and 
related programs. The major requires 42 credits of core requirements, 48 credits of major requirements, and 
30 credits in general electives, for a total of 120 credits.  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Behavioral Sciences  

Program Objectives  

1.  Describe major theoretical perspectives in the behavioral sciences and apply them to the analysis of 

human behavior and social structures.  

2.  Critically evaluate the validity of competing theories and models of human behavior and social 

structures.  

3.  Gather data from interviewing and observing human subjects, analyze and interpret the data, and 

critically evaluate theories that provide valid insight into and understanding of the human 
condition.  

4.  Communicate effectively in a professional setting in both written and oral forms following standards 

and guidelines of the American Psychological Association.  

5.  Describe the role of society and culture in human behavior and social structures.  

42 credits  

48 credits 

Core Requirements 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
SOCW 412 Senior Thesis - Senior Capstone 

Department Major Requirements 
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
PSYC 203 Theories of Personality - 3 credits 
PSYC 204 Abnormal Psychology - 3 credits 
SOCW 202 Social Issues - 3 credits 
SOCW 221 Introduction to Social Work - 3 credits 
SOCW 326 Social Welfare Policy - 3 credits 
SOCW 352 Research Methodology in the Human Sciences - 3 credits 

126 

 
         
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Four 300+ level courses in PSYC - 12 credits 
Two 100+ level courses in CENG, GCS, PHIL, MLNG, POLS, SJS, SOC, or SOCW  
Two 200+ level courses in CENG, GCS, PHIL, MLNG, POLS, SJS, SOC, or SOCW  
One 300+ level course in CENG, GCS, PHIL, MLNG, POLS, SJS, SOC, or SOCW 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree    

30 credits  
120 credits  

Psychology  

The program leading to the Bachelor of Arts degree in Psychology requires a minimum of 48 credits in 
Psychology, tailored to an individual student’s needs, such as preparation for graduate school or for a vocation 
immediately following graduation. Students can receive specialized training in specific areas by electing to take 
one of four recommended course sequences: Clinical Psychology, Child Psychology, Community Psychology, 
or Forensic Psychology. Students can also elect to  take  a  more  broadly based sequence  of courses (General 
Psychology).  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Psychology  

Program Objectives  

1.  Describe major theoretical perspectives in psychology and apply them to the analysis of human 

behavior.  

2.  Critically evaluate the validity of competing theories and models of human behavior.  
3.  Gather data from interviewing and observing human subjects, analyze and interpret the data, and 
generate theories to provide valid insight into and understanding of the human condition.  

4.  Communicate effectively in a professional setting in both written and oral forms following standards 

and guidelines from the American Psychological Association.  

42 credits  

48 credits  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
PSYC 412 Senior Thesis - Senior Capstone 

Department B.A. Major Requirements  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  
PSYC 151 Theoretical Foundations to Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 201 Critical Thinking in Psych & Behavioral Sciences - 3 credits 
PSYC 202 Ancient to Modern Approaches to Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 251 Lifespan Development - 3 credits  
PSYC 302 Modern and Postmodern Approaches to Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 306 Psychopathology: Critical Perspectives - 3 credits 
PSYC 313 Critical Social Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 348 Psychology of Diversity - 3 credits 
PSYC 352 Research Methodology in Human Sciences - 3 credits  
Two 200+ Level PSYC Courses*  
Four 300+ Level PSYC Courses* 

127 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Students can declare an optional concentration in Clinical Psychology, Child Psychology, Community 
Psychology, or Forensic Psychology.  

*Psychology Courses 

200-Level Courses: (6 credits) 
PSYC 203 Theories of Personality - 3 credits  
PSYC 204 Abnormal Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 208 Introduction to Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Theories and Approach- 3 credits 
PSYC 210 Child & Adolescent Psychology - 3 credits  
PSYC 213 Social Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 214 Psychology of Emotion - 3 credits 
PSYC 216 Psychology of Religion & Spirituality - 3 credits 
PSYC 217 Psychology of Evil & Human Destructiveness - 3 credits 
PSYC 230 The Characterological and Psychotic in Fiction and Film - 3 credits  
PSYC 231 Interpersonal Relationships - 3 credits  
PSYC 241 LGBTQ Mental Health - 3 credits 
PSYC 245 Introduction to Forensic Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 253 Psychology of Sexual Behavior - 3 credits  
PSYC 263 Psychology of Parenting - 3 credits 
PSYC 266 Art Therapy - 3 credits  
PSYC 267 Zombies and Psychological Life - 3 credits 
PSYC 295 Special Topics in Psychology - 3 credits 

300-Level Courses: (12 credits) 
PSYC 304 Counseling Theories and Practice - 3 credits  
PSYC 305 Counseling Practicum - 3 credits  
PSYC 316 Existential and Phenomenological Psychology - 3 credits  
PSYC 317 Psychology of Adolescence - 3 credits 
PSYC 318 Music and Psychological Life- 3 credits  
PSYC 319 Psychology of Consciousness - 3 credits  
PSYC 320 Criminal Psychopathology - 3 credits  
PSYC 321 Happiness, Well-Being and Human Strengths - 3 credits  
PSYC 323 Indigenous Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 350 Community Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 365 Children’s Mental Health - 3 credits  
PSYC 377 Ecopsychology - 3 credits  
PSYC 395 Special Topics in Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 418 Psychology of Adult Development - 3 credits  
PSYC 455 Institutional Practicum I - 3 credits  
PSYC 456 Institutional Practicum II - 3 credits  
PSYC 495 Special Topics in Psychology - 3 credits 

Optional Concentrations: 

128 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Psychology (Choose Three): 
PSYC 208 Introduction to Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Theories and Approach- 3 credits 
PSYC 214 Psychology of Emotion - 3 credits 
PSYC 304 Counseling Theories and Practices - 3 credits 
PSYC 365 Children’s Mental Health - 3 credits  
PSYC 295/395 Special Topics in Psychology - 3 credits 

Child Psychology (Choose Three): 
PSYC 210 Child & Adolescent Psychology - 3 credits  
PSYC 263 Psychology of Parenting - 3 credits  
PSYC 365 Children’s Mental Health - 3 credits 
PSYC 295/395 Special Topics - 3 credits 

Community Psychology (Choose Three):  
PSYC 231 Interpersonal Relationships - 3 credits 
PSYC 267 Zombies and Psychological Life - 3 credits 
PSYC 350 Community Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 295/395 Special Topics - 3 credits 

Forensic Psychology (Choose Three):  
PSYC 245 Introduction to Forensic Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 217 Psychology of Evil & Human Destructiveness - 3 credits 
PSYC 320 Criminal Psychopathology - 3 credits 
PSYC 325 Horror, Anxiety, Uncanny - 3 credits  
PSYC 366 Conspiracy Theory - 3 credits  
PSYC 295/395 Special Topics - 3 credits 

General Electives   
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

B.A./M.A. Psychology  
Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
PSYC 412 Senior Thesis - Senior Capstone 

Department B.A. Major Requirements 
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  
PSYC 151 Theoretical Foundations to Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 201 Critical Thinking in Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 202 Ancient to Modern Approaches to Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 251 Lifespan Development - 3 credits  
PSYC 302 Modern and Postmodern Approaches to Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 306 Psychopathology: Critical Perspectives - 3 credits 
PSYC 313 Critical Social Psychology - 3 credits  
PSYC 348 Psychology of Diversity - 3 credits 

129 

30 credits 
120 credits 

42 credits  

48 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
PSYC 352 Research Methodology in Human Sciences - 3 credits  

Select 2 Courses (PSYC 200 Level) (6) 
PSYC 203 Theories of Personality - 3 credits 
PSYC 204 Abnormal Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 208 Introduction to Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Theories and Approach - 3 credits 
PSYC 210 Child & Adolescent Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 213 Social Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 214 Psychology of Emotion - 3 credits  
PSYC 216 Psychology of Religion & Spirituality - 3 credits 
PSYC 217 Psychology of Evil & Human Destructiveness - 3 credits 
PSYC 230 The Characterological and Psychotic in Fiction and Film - 3 credits 
PSYC 231 Interpersonal Relationships - 3 credits  
PSYC 241 LGBTQ Mental Health - 3 credits 
PSYC 245 Introduction to Forensic Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 253 Psychology of Sexual Behavior - 3 credits  
PSYC 263 Psychology of Parenting - 3 credits  
PSYC 266 Art Therapy - 3 credits 
PSYC 267 Zombies and Psychological Life - 3 credits 
PSYC 295 Special Topics in Psychology - 3 credits 

30 credits 

24 credits 

Graduate Courses (Taken in Senior Year) (12) 
PSYC 503 Community Psychology - 3 credits (Fall) 
PSYC 561 Social Psychology - 3 credits (Spring) 
PSYC 500+ Graduate Elective - 3 credits (Fall) 
PSYC 500+ Graduate Elective - 3 credits (Spring) 

B.A. General Electives 

M.A. Requirements 
Year 5 - Fall 

PSYC 511 Humanistic and Phenomenological Approaches to Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 551 Quantitative Research Methods - 3 credits 
PSYC 563 Program Development, Evaluation and Assessment - 3 credits 
PSYC 500+ Elective - 3 credits 

Year 5 - Spring 

PSYC 531 Psychopathology in the Context of Society and Culture - 3 credits 
PSYC 631 Ethical and Professional Issues - 3 credits 
PSYC 500+ Elective - 3 credits 
PSYC 500+ Elective - 3 credits 

M.A. Electives (For PSYC 500+ Electives in Senior Year and Year 5) 

PSYC 524 Childhood & Society - 3 credits 
PSYC 525 Lifespan Development - 3 credits 
PSYC 532 Mental Health & Well-Being: Individual and Collective - 3 credits 

130 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PSYC 541 Brain, Body and Experience - 3 credits 
PSYC 555 Critical Race Studies - 3 credits 
PSYC 556 Girls’ and Women’s Mental Health - 3 credits 
PSYC 557 Integrative Mental Health - 3 credits 
PSYC 558 Introduction to Grant Writing - 3 credits 
PSYC 559 LGBTQ Studies - 3 credits 
PSYC 560 Mindfulness: Buddhist and Contemplative Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 595 Special Topics in Clinical-Community Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 642 Critical Theory in the Social Sciences - 3 credits 
PSYC 643 Dynamics of Social Systems - 3 credits 
PSYC 646 Psychology of Religion and Spirituality - 3 credits 
PSYC 647 Psychology of Sex and Gender - 3 credits 
PSYC 648 Psychology of Human Diversity - 3 credits 
PSYC 649 Psychology of Emotion and Motivation - 3 credits 
PSYC 652 Community Practicum I - 3 credits 
PSYC 653 Community Practicum II - 3 credits 
PSYC 693 Research Practicum I - 3 credits 
PSYC 694 Research Practicum II - 3 credits 
PSYC 695 Advanced Special Topics in Clinical-Community Psychology - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.A./M.A. degree  

144 credits 

Minors in the Department of Psychology  

The minors for the Department of Psychology listed below are available to all students at Point Park 

University. The minor consists of a minimum of 18 credits.  

Behavioral Sciences Minor (18 credits)  
Minor:  
SOCW 221 Intro to Social Work - 3 credits 
SOCW 326 Social Welfare Policy - 3 credits 
Choose two 200+ Level SOC or SOCW courses - 6 credits 
Choose two 200+ Level PSYC courses - 6 credits 

Psychology Minor (18 credits)  
Prerequisite:  
PSYC 150 Psychological Foundations OR PSYC 151 Theoretical Foundations to Psychology - 3 credits  
Minor:  
Five additional courses in Psychology  

Graduate Studies  
The Department of Psychology offers a Master of Arts in Community Psychology degree, a Master of Arts in 
Clinical-Community Counseling Psychology degree, and a Psy.D. in Clinical Psychology degree. For a graduate 
catalog or information, visit the website or please call Graduate Admissions Office at (412) 392-3808.  
The Department of Natural Sciences and Engineering  

131 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Professors: Laura Frost, Ph.D.; Robert Garson, Ph.D.; Donald Keller, Ph.D.; Diane Krill, Ph.D.; Mark 
Marnich, Ed.D.; Matthew Pascal, PhD. (Chair) 
Associate Professors: Gregg Johnson, Ph.D.; Yan Liu, Ph.D.; Aram Parsa, Ph.D.; Pattabhiraju Mundru, 
Ph.D. 
Assistant Professors: Ryan Hoover, PhD.; Hannah Dollish, Ph.D. 
Senior Lecturer: Kristy Long, M.S. 
Lecturers: Connor Murphy, Ph.D. 

The  Department  of  Natural  Sciences  and  Engineering  has  programs  in  the  following  areas  of  study: 
Biological  Sciences,  Civil  Engineering,  Electrical  Engineering,  Mechanical  Engineering,  Pre-Medical  and 
Health Related Professions, and Funeral Services. These programs leading to the Bachelor of Science degree 
provide  the  specialized  education  needed  for  a  career  along  with  a  substantial  general  education  to  enable 
graduates to pursue  advanced  degrees and to  relate their  technical and scientific knowledge  to humanistic, 
social, and cultural activities. A close association between the technical and scientific disciplines within the 
department allows for a meaningful alliance between application and theory.  

The  programs  leading  to  the  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  with  majors  in  Electrical  and  Mechanical 

Engineering are accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET (www.abet.org).   

All NSET students must complete the 100-level courses in the Department General Requirements 

and Major Requirements before registering for any 400-level courses in their major. 

Entertainment Production Engineering 

The  Bachelor  of  Science  in  Entertainment  Production  Engineering  will  provide  extensive  training  for 
students  in  the  technical  design  and  production  of  live  entertainment  events,  supported  by  academic  and 
industry professionals in engineering, production and management, in the classroom and in the field.  

Program Objectives  

1.  Apply a thorough understanding of lighting, sound, stage mechanics, and special effects to events in 

2. 

live entertainment. 
Integrate engineering principles with entertainment production principles to create advanced technical 
solutions mindful of audience experience, safety, efficiency, venue constraints, and aesthetics. 
3.  Lead a multidisciplinary team working to manage projects, communicate effectively across technical 

and creative domains, and foster an inclusive environment that encourages innovation and teamwork. 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Entertainment Production Engineering  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
PHYS 101 Physics I - Investigate Science 
MATH 190 Calculus I - Investigate Mathematics 
SAEM 152 Business of Live Entertainment - Succeed in Business 
EGR 101 Intro to Engineering - Discover Technology 
EPE 421 EPE Capstone II - Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  
EE 101 Circuit Analysis I - 3 credits 
EE 102 Circuit Analysis II - 3 credits 
EE 103 Circuit Analysis Laboratory I - 1 credit 

132 

43 credits  

68 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EE 104 Circuit Analysis Laboratory II - 1 credit 
EPE 101 Introduction to Entertainment and Production Engineering I - 1 credit 
EPE 102 Introduction to Entertainment Production Engineering II - 1 credit 
EPE 399 EPE Field Experiences - 12 credits 
EPE 420 EPE Capstone I - 3 credits 
ET 204 Programming for Engineering Technology - 3 credits 
MATH 205 EPE Calculus - 3 credits 
ME 201 Engineering Mechanics - 3 credits 
ME 250 Engineering Materials - 3 credits 
ME 430 EPE Solid Mechanics I - 2 credits 
ME 431 EPE Solid Mechanics II - 2 credits 
ME 440 EPE Fluid Mechanics I - 1.5 credits 
ME 441 EPE Fluid Mechanics II - 1.5 credits 
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit 
PHYS 104 Physics Laboratory II - 1 credit 
PHYS 202 Fundamentals of Physics II - 3 credits 
PROD 110 (x2) Production Practicum - 4 credits 
PROD 113 Stage Operations - 2 credits 
PROD 140 Theatre Safety - 2 credits 
PROD 142 Drafting and CAD - 3 credits 
PROD 363 Automation - 2 credits 
PROD 413 Technical Direction - 3 credits 
SAEM 331 Production Tour Management - 3 credits 

Electives and Optional Concentrations 
Students must accumulate at least 12 elective credits from among the electives below. Selecting a minimum of 12 credits 
from those in a category below will satisfy a concentration for that category. Only one course may be used for multiple 
concentrations. Completed concentrations will be listed on students' transcripts. 

12 credits 

I. Business Fundamentals Concentration/Electives  
(12 credits needed to complete Optional Concentration) 
SAEM 201 Event Management - 3 credits 
SAEM 301 Facilities/Venue Design & Administration - 3 credits 
SAEM 330 Talent Booking Management - 3 credits 
SAEM 332 Emerging Trends in the Music Industry - 3 credits 

II. Safety and Management Concentration/Electives  
(12 credits needed to complete Optional Concentration) 
BMGT 331 Safety and Security in the Hospitality Industry - 3 credits 
CE 401 Construction Management - 3 credits 
PROD 212 Computer Applications for Managers - 3 credits 
PROD 433 AEA & Theatre Unions - 3 credits 
PROD 440 Production Management - 3 credits  

III. Scenic and Structural Systems Concentration/Electives  
(12 credits needed to complete Optional Concentration) 
To complete the concentration, select at least two courses from: 

133 

 
 
 
 
 
CE 310 Structural Analysis - 3 credits 
CE 315 Concrete Structural Design - 3 credits 
CE 316 Steel Structural Design - 3 credits 
CE 401 Construction Management - 3 credits 
And the remaining credits from: 
PROD 213 Carpentry for the Theatre - 2 credits 
PROD 226 Scene Design I - 3 credits 
PROD 313 Technical Design - 2 credits 
PROD 361 Advanced CAD - 2 credits 
PROD 362 Metalworking - 2 credits 
SAEM 301 Facilities/Venue Design & Administration - 3 credits 

IV. Design and Visual Communications Concentration/Electives  
(12 credits needed to complete Optional Concentration) 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
DIGI 102 Digital Design Tools and Techniques - 3 credits 
DIGI 210 Fundamentals of Motion Graphics and Visual Effects - 3 credits 
EGR 205 Engineering Graphics - 3 credits 
GRID 103 Graphic Design I - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
PROD 361 Advanced CAD - 2 credits 
PROD 392 Video Production - 2 credits 
PROD 393 Vectorworks - 2 credits 

V. Electrical Systems Concentration/Electives  
(12 credits needed to complete Optional Concentration) 
To complete the concentration, complete: 
EITHER: 
EE 331 Electrical Power I - 4 credits 
EE 332 Electrical Power II - 4 credits 
OR: 
EE 221 Electronics I - 4 credits 
EE 222 Electronics II - 4 credits 
And the remaining credits from: 
EE 221 Electronics I - 4 credits 
EE 222 Electronics II - 4 credits 
EE 331 Electrical Power I - 4 credits 
EE 332 Electrical Power II - 4 credits 
EE 351 Digital Electronics I - 3 credits 
EE 352 Microprocessors I - 3 credits 
EE 455 Digital Electronics II - 4 credits 
PROD 227 Lighting I - 3 credits 
PROD 229 Audio Design - 2 credits 
PROD 343 Electricity for the Theatre - 2 credits 
PROD 391 Audio Engineering - 2 credits 
PROD 392 Video Production - 2 credits 

134 

 
 
 
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

123 credits 

Biological Sciences  

The  program leading to the Bachelor of Science  degree with a major in Biological Sciences offers four 
concentrations:  Bioinformatics,  Cellular-Molecular  Biology,  Environmental,  and  Organismal  Biology.  The 
program is designed to provide an introduction to the breadth of the field and allow students to focus study in 
one concentration. The concentrations promote deeper learning in the chosen area of study to prepare students 
for graduate or professional school or to embark upon a career path. The curriculum encourages students to 
participate in available internships with various agencies, including government and industry. A minor in a 
complementary area is highly recommended.  

Program Objectives  

1.  Recognize structure-function relationship in biological systems including membranes, nucleic acids, 

proteins, cells, and organelles.  

2.  Relate the principles of cellular energetics.  
3.  Describe how mutation leads to evolution and species diversity. 
4.  Distinguish the processes involved in duplication, expression, and inheritance of genetic material. 
5.  Compare and contrast major biological characteristics of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, including: 

a.  Cell structures 
b.  Replication, inheritance/recombination, expression, and regulation of gene expression 
c.  Relate methods of microbial control, including physical, chemical, and chemotherapeutic 

6. Evaluate, interpret, and discuss scientific journal articles. 
7. Plan, design, and execute an experiment following the tenets of the scientific method. 
8. Communicate effectively in both written and oral formats. 
9. Demonstrate proficiency in the lab with the following: 

a.   Microscopy 
b.   Basic analysis of DNA and proteins 
c.   Field and environmental techniques 
d.   Lab safety 

10. Characterize the roles of humans in and on the environment. 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Biological Sciences  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - Investigate Science 
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
BIOL 449 Biology Seminar - Capstone 

Department General Requirements  
BIOL 101 General Biology I - 3 credits  
BIOL 102 General Biology II - 3 credits  
BIOL 103 General Biology Laboratory I - 1 credit  
BIOL 104 General Biology Laboratory II - 1 credit  
CHEM 102 General Chemistry II - 3 credits 

135 

42 credits  

28 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  
CHEM 104 General Chemistry Laboratory II - 1 credit  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  
MATH 190 Calculus I - 4 credits  
PHYS 101 Physics I - 3 credits  
PHYS 102 Physics II - 3 credits  
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  
PHYS 104 Physics Laboratory II - 1 credit  

Department Major Requirements  
BIOL 205 Botany OR  

BIOL 206 Zoology - 4 credits 

BIOL 210 Biological Evolution OR  

BIOL 235 Introduction to Ecology - 3 credits  

BIOL 216 Microbiology - 4 credits  
BIOL 222 Introduction to Genetics - 4 credits  
BIOL 350 Molecular/Cellular Biology - 4 credits  
CHEM 221 Organic Chemistry - 3 credits  
CHEM 222 Organic Chemistry II - 3 credits  
CHEM 223 Organic Chemistry Laboratory - 2 credits  

27 credits  

Choose a Concentration 
Bioinformatics Concentration 
BIOL 300 Receptors, Signaling Pathways, and Cellular Control Mechanisms - 3 credits 
BIOL310 Bioinformatics - 3 credits 
BIOL 451 Drug Discovery and Development - 3 credits 
ET 204 Programming for Engineering Technology - 3 credits 

12-14 credits 

Cellular /Molecular Concentration  
BIOL 320 Biochemistry - 3 credits  
BIOL 365 Developmental Biology - 3 credits  
BIOL 420 Immunology - 3 credits 
BIOL 300 Receptors, Signaling Pathways, and Cellular Control Mechanisms - 3 credits  

Environmental Concentration 
BIOL 205 Botany - 4 credits 
BIOL 235 Introduction to Ecology - 3 credits 
BIOL 341 Environmental Health - 3 credits 
BIOL 443 Application in Environmental Science - 3 credits 

Organismal Concentration  
BIOL 206 Zoology - 4 credits 
BIOL 225 Anatomy and Physiology I - 4 credits  
BIOL 226 Anatomy and Physiology II - 4 credits  
BIOL 410 Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy - 3 credits  

Directed Electives  

6 credits 

136 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

6 credits 
121-123 credits 

Pre-Medical and Health Related Professions Program 

The Pre-Medical and Health Related Professions program serves students of all majors. Students are 

advised by faculty advisors who assist them in tailoring a curriculum that meets all prerequisite 
courses/requirements for their chosen programs/schools. As medical schools, physician assistant programs 
and other programs can vary widely in their admissions requirements, students need attentive advising and 
need to identify target programs fairly early on in their undergraduate programs. This program also serves 
students who wish to study veterinary medicine, or attend any graduate program in the medical/health 
professions.  

The program committee will serve as the primary point of contact for affiliate programs like Lake Erie 

College of Osteopathic Medicine (LECOM) and for admission of students into the program. All student 
updates, GPA confirmations, student inquiries, and committee letters will also be the responsibility of the 
Committee.  

Admittance into the program is directed by the Pre-Medical and Health Related Professions program 

committee and the criteria to remain in the program includes maintaining a GPA of 3.0 or higher and 
remaining in good academic and social standing within the University.  

Civil Engineering 

Program Educational Objectives 

1.  Graduates  will  achieve  personal  and  professional  growth  by  pursuing  licensure,  professional 

development activities, advanced studies, and new career opportunities. 

2.  Graduates will develop their professions by applying their strong Civil Engineering, problem solving, 
business,  leadership,  and  communication  skills  to  meet  the  expectations  of  their  employers  and 
society. 

3.  Graduates will engage their community by serving their diverse communities locally, nationally, and 

internationally.  

Graduates of the Bachelor of Science degree program in Civil Engineering are well-prepared to undertake 
positions  of  technical  and  managerial  responsibility  in  industry  and  government  and  to  continue  their 
education in graduate school. To ensure this high level of preparation, faculty in the program emphasize the 
need for students to acquire, practice, and demonstrate a core group of skills called outcomes. 

Student Outcomes 

1. An ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of 
engineering, science, and mathematics. 
2. An ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with consideration 
of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic factors. 
3. An ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences. 
4. An ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and make informed 
judgements, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, economic, environmental, and 
societal contexts. 
5. An ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a collaborative 
and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives. 

137 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. An ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interrupt data, and use 
engineering judgement to draw conclusions. 
7. An ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies. 

Every technical course, required or elective, has prerequisites that a student must satisfy before enrolling 
in the course. Therefore, students are encouraged to consult with their academic advisors frequently and to 
plan  their  programs  of  study  carefully  to  ensure  that  they  make  steady  and  satisfactory  progress  toward 
completion of their degrees.   

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Civil Engineering  

The program leading to the Bachelor of Science degree with a major in Civil Engineering intends to meet 
the  accreditation  requirements  of  the  Engineering  Technology  Accreditation  Commission  of  ABET 
(www.abet.org).  

43 credits  

86 credits 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - Investigate Science 
MATH 190 Calculus I - Investigate Mathematics 
ECON 202 Microeconomics - Succeed in Business 
EGR 101 Introduction to Engineering - Discover Technology 
CE 407 Civil Engineering - Senior Capstone 

Department Major Requirements 
CE 205 Introduction to Surveying - 3 credits  
CE 209 Engineering Geology - 3 credits  
CE 213 Strength of Materials - 3 credits  
CE 214 Strength of Materials Laboratory - 1 credit  
CE 309 Soil Mechanics - 3 credits  
CE 310 Structural Analysis - 3 credits  
CE 315 Concrete Structural Design - 3 credits  
CE 316 Steel Structural Design - 3 credits  
CE 319 Soil Mechanics Laboratory - 1 credit 
CE 320 Environmental Engineering Technology I - 3 credits 
CE 321 Environmental Engineering Technology II - 3 credits 
CE 401 Construction Management - 3 credits 
CE 409 Foundations Design - 3 credits 
CE 410 Transportation Engineering - 3 credits  
CE 411 Fluid Mechanics - 3 credits  
CE 412 Fluid Mechanics Laboratory - 1 credit  
CE 418 Hydraulics - 3 credits 
CHEM 102 General Chemistry II - 3 credit 
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  
CHEM 104 General Chemistry Laboratory II - 1 credit  
ET 405 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination I - 0 credits  
ET 406 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination II - 0 credits  
EGR 205 Engineering Graphics - 3 credits  
MATH 210 Calculus II - 4 credits  

138 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MATH 230 Linear Algebra I - 3 credits  
MATH 310 Differential Equations - 3 credits  
MATH 330 Mathematical Statistics - 3 credits 
ME 101 Statics - 3 credits 
ME 102 Dynamics - 3 credits 
ME 212 Properties of Materials - 3 credits 
NSET 218 Technical Communications - 3 credits 
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  
PHYS 104 Physics Laboratory II - 1 credit 
PHYS 201 Fundamentals of Physics I - 3 credits  
PHYS 202 Fundamentals of Physics II - 3 credits  

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

129 credits 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Civil Engineering with the Theatrical 
Engineering minor 

The program leading to the Bachelor of Science degree with a major in Civil Engineering intends to meet 
the  accreditation  requirements  of  the  Engineering  Technology  Accreditation  Commission  of  ABET 
(www.abet.org).  

43 credits  

86 credits 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
THEA 225 Theatre History I - Explore the World 
THEA 226 Theatre History II - Explore the World 
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - Investigate Science 
MATH 190 Calculus I - Investigate Mathematics 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - Succeed in Business 
THEA 230 Introduction to Theatre – Appreciate & Apply the Arts 
TE 101 Introduction to Theatrical Engineering - Discover Technology 
TE 402 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering II - Senior Capstone 

Department Major Requirements 
CE 205 Introduction to Surveying - 3 credits  
CE 209 Engineering Geology - 3 credits  
CE 213 Strength of Materials - 3 credits  
CE 214 Strength of Materials Laboratory - 1 credit  
CE 309 Soil Mechanics - 3 credits  
CE 310 Structural Analysis - 3 credits  
CE 315 Concrete Structural Design - 3 credits  
CE 316 Steel Structural Design - 3 credits  
CE 319 Soil Mechanics Laboratory - 1 credit 
CE 320 Environmental Engineering Technology I - 3 credits 
CE 321 Environmental Engineering Technology II - 3 credits 
CE 409 Foundations Design - 3 credits 
CE 410 Transportation Engineering - 3 credits  

139 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CE 411 Fluid Mechanics - 3 credits  
CE 412 Fluid Mechanics Laboratory - 1 credit  
CE 418 Hydraulics - 3 credits 
CHEM 102 General Chemistry II - 3 credit 
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  
CHEM 104 General Chemistry Laboratory II - 1 credit  
ET 405 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination I - 0 credits  
ET 406 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination II - 0 credits  
EGR 205 Engineering Graphics - 3 credits  
MATH 210 Calculus II - 4 credits  
MATH 230 Linear Algebra I - 3 credits 
MATH 310 Differential Equations - 3 credits  
MATH 330 Mathematical Statistics - 3 credits 
ME 101 Statics - 3 credits 
ME 102 Dynamics - 3 credits 
ME 212 Properties of Materials - 3 credits 
NSET 218 Technical Communications - 3 credits 
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  
PHYS 104 Physics Laboratory II - 1 credit 
PHYS 201 Fundamentals of Physics I - 3 credits  
PHYS 202 Fundamentals of Physics II - 3 credits 
TE 401 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering I - 3 credits  

Courses Required to Complete the Minor (21 Credits) 
PROD 110 Production Practicum I - 4 credits (Taken twice, 2 credits each) 
PROD 124 Fundamentals of Design and Drawing - 3 credits 
PROD 226 Scene Design I - 3 credits 
PROD 227 Lighting I - 3 credits 
PROD 229 Audio Design - 2 credits 
TE 401 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering I - 3 credits 
TE 402 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering II - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.S. degree with Minor 

144 credits 

Electrical Engineering  

The program leading to the Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical Engineering prepares graduates 
for immediate employment throughout the engineering enterprise and for further study in a wide variety of 
analytical and creative fields including engineering, law, business, and technical communication. 

The first three years of the program include a sequence of required electrical engineering courses as well 
as several mathematics and science courses that provide critical background for the major. All of these courses 
must be taken on the schedule recommended by the faculty in order for full-time students to finish the program 
within four academic years. The senior year in the program is devoted to the study of four technical electives 
and to the completion of a full-year capstone design experience. 

The  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  program  in  Electrical  Engineering  is  accredited  by  the  Engineering 

Accreditation Commission of ABET (www.abet.org). 

140 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  program  adheres  to  the  principles  and  practices  of  outcomes-based  education.  Routine  use  of 
assessment  and  evaluation  provide  for  a  process  of  continuous  improvement  and  responsiveness  to  all 
stakeholders. The operating statements of outcomes-based education are the program educational objectives 
and the student outcomes as described below. 

Program Educational Objectives 

Program educational objectives are broad statements of the personal and professional achievements that 
recent graduates of an educational program should demonstrate in the first several years following graduation. 
The  faculty  in  consultation  with  the  program’s  industrial  advisory  committee  have  established  the  four 
objectives listed below for graduates of the Bachelor of Science degree program in Electrical Engineering. These 
objectives are reviewed regularly to ensure that they continue to express the core values of the program and the 
needs of the engineering profession. 

1.  Graduates will achieve professional distinction and personal satisfaction in careers that make 

use of their            education, experience, and abilities. 

2.  Graduates will develop effective communication and collaboration skills in diverse 

interdisciplinary environments. 

3.  Graduates will attain high standards of ethical behavior and social responsibility while inspiring 

their colleagues to do likewise. 

4.  Graduates will pursue intellectual growth by earning advanced degrees, achieving licensure in 

their professions, and engaging in ongoing self-directed learning. 

Student Outcomes 

Student outcomes are statements of the knowledge and skills that students in an educational 

program are expected to demonstrate by the time of graduation. 

The faculty have established the following outcomes for students pursuing the Bachelor of Science 

degree program in Electrical Engineering. Students' success in achieving these outcomes is measured regularly 
using a variety of assessment tools such as in-class problems and surveys. 

1.  Students will identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles 
of engineering, science, and mathematics. 
2.  Students will apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with 
consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, 
and economic factors. 
3.  Students will communicate effectively with a range of audiences. 
4.  Students will recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and 
make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, 
economic, environmental, and societal contexts. 
5.  Students will function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a 
collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives. 
6.  Students will develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and 
use engineering judgment to draw conclusions; and 
7. Students will acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies. 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Electrical Engineering  

Core Requirements  

43 credits  

141 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 credits  

Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - Investigate Science 
MATH 190 Calculus I - Investigate Mathematics  
EGR 101 Introduction to Engineering - Discover Technology 
EGR 402 Engineering Design II - Capstone  

Department Major Requirements  
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  
EE 101 Circuit Analysis I - 3 credits 
EE 102 Circuit Analysis II - 3 credits 
EE 103 Circuit Analysis Laboratory I - 1 credit 
EE 104 Circuit Analysis Laboratory II - 1 credit 
EE 221 Electronics I - 4 credits 
EE 222 Electronics II - 4 credits 
EE 331 Electrical Power I - 4 credits 
EE 332 Electrical Power II - 4 credits 
EE 351 Digital Electronics I - 3 credits 
EE 352 Microprocessors I - 3 credits 
EE 375 Signals and Systems - 4 credits 
EGR 401 Engineering Design I - 3 credits 
ET 204 Programming for Engineering Technology - 3 credits  
ET 405 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination I - 0 credits  
ET 406 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination II - 0 credits  
MATH 210 Calculus II - 4 credits  
MATH 230 Linear Algebra I - 3 credits  
MATH 300 Calculus III - 4 credits 
MATH 310 Differential Equations - 3 credits  
MATH 330 Mathematical Statistics - 3 credits  
ME 101 Statics - 3 credits  
ME 102 Dynamics - 3 credits  
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  
PHYS 104 Physics Laboratory II - 1 credit  
PHYS 201 Fundamentals of Physics I - 3 credits 
PHYS 202 Fundamentals of Physics II - 3 credits 

Technical Electives (minimum of 16 credits from the following):  
EE 415 Electromagnetics - 4 credits 
EE 425 Power Electronics - 4 credits 
EE 435 Electrical Distribution Systems - 4 credits 
EE 445 Control Systems - 4 credits 
EE 455 Digital Electronics II - 4 credits 
EE 465 Communication Electronics - 4 credits 
EE 467 Digital Signal Processing - 4 credits 

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

131 credits 

142 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Electrical Engineering with the Theatrical 
Engineering minor 

43 credits  

88 credits  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
THEA 225 History of Theatre I - Explore the World Choice 1 
THEA 226 History of Theatre II - Explore the World Choice 2 
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - Investigate Science 
MATH 190 Calculus I - Investigate Mathematics  
THEA 230 Introduction to Theatre - Appreciate & Apply the Arts 
TE 101 Introduction to Theatrical Engineering - Discover Technology 
TE 402 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering II - Senior Capstone  

Department Major Requirements  
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  
EE 101 Circuit Analysis I - 3 credits 
EE 102 Circuit Analysis II - 3 credits 
EE 103 Circuit Analysis Laboratory I - 1 credit 
EE 104 Circuit Analysis Laboratory II - 1 credit 
EE 221 Electronics I - 4 credits 
EE 222 Electronics II - 4 credits 
EE 331 Electrical Power I - 4 credits 
EE 332 Electrical Power II - 4 credits 
EE 351 Digital Electronics I - 3 credits 
EE 352 Microprocessors I - 3 credits 
EE 375 Signals and Systems - 4 credits 
ET 204 Programming for Engineering Technology - 3 credits  
ET 405 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination I - 0 credits  
ET 406 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination II - 0 credits  
MATH 210 Calculus II - 4 credits  
MATH 230 Linear Algebra I - 3 credits  
MATH 300 Calculus III - 4 credits 
MATH 310 Differential Equations - 3 credits  
MATH 330 Mathematical Statistics - 3 credits  
ME 101 Statics - 3 credits  
ME 102 Dynamics - 3 credits  
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  
PHYS 104 Physics Laboratory II - 1 credit  
PHYS 201 Fundamentals of Physics I - 3 credits 
PHYS 202 Fundamentals of Physics II - 3 credits 
TE 401 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering I - 3 credits 

Technical Electives (minimum of 16 credits from the following):  
EE 415 Electromagnetics - 4 credits 
EE 425 Power Electronics - 4 credits 
EE 435 Electrical Distribution Systems - 4 credits 

143 

 
 
 
 
EE 445 Control Systems - 4 credits 
EE 455 Digital Electronics II - 4 credits 
EE 465 Communication Electronics - 4 credits 
EE 467 Digital Signal Processing - 4 credits 

Courses Required to Complete the Minor (21 Credits) 
PROD 110 Production Practicum I - 4 credits (Taken twice, 2 credits each) 
PROD 124 Fundamentals of Design and Drawing - 3 credits 
PROD 226 Scene Design I - 3 credits 
PROD 227 Lighting I - 3 credits 
PROD 229 Audio Design - 2 credits 
TE 401 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering I - 3 credits 
TE 402 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering II - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

146 credits 

Mechanical Engineering 

The program leading to the Bachelor of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering prepares graduates to 
make an immediate and substantial contribution as they enter the work force as professional engineers.  The 
emphasis is on acquiring the wide variety of analytic and creative skills required by an engineer.  Due attention 
is also paid to aspects of law and business practice. 

The first three years of the program include a sequence of required mechanical engineering courses as well 
as several mathematics and science courses that provide critical background for the major. All of these courses 
must be taken on the schedule recommended by the faculty in order for full-time students to finish the program 
within four academic years.  

The  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  program  in  Mechanical  Engineering  is  accredited  by  the  Engineering 

Accreditation Commission of ABET (www.abet.org). 

The program adheres to the principles and practices of outcomes-based education. Routine use of 
assessment and evaluation provide for a process of continuous improvement and responsiveness to all 
stakeholders. The operating statements of outcomes-based education are the program educational objectives 
and the student outcomes as described below. 

Program Educational Objectives 

Program educational objectives are broad statements of the personal and professional achievements 
that  recent  graduates  of  an  educational  program  should  demonstrate  in  the  first  several  years  following 
graduation. 

The faculty, in consultation with the program's industrial advisory committee, have established the 
three  objectives  listed  below  for  graduates  of  the  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  program  in  mechanical 
engineering. These objectives are reviewed regularly to ensure that they continue to express the core values of 
the program and the needs of the engineering profession. 

1. Graduates will apply acute analytical skills, draw upon a thorough knowledge of best engineering 
practices,  demonstrate  intense  application  to  the  task  at  hand,  and  become  leaders  within  the 
organization of their affiliation. 
2.  Graduates will  recognize  and  embrace  the  benefits  of  higher  education  and  will  themselves 
disseminate knowledge through acclaimed publications. 

144 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Graduates will be pivotal within the community and will inspire others to engage in the betterment 
of society. 

Student Outcomes 

Student outcomes are statements of the knowledge and skills that students in an educational 

program are expected to demonstrate by the time of graduation. Attainment of these outcomes (1) through 
(7) prepares graduates to enter the professional practice of engineering. 

The faculty have established the following outcomes for students pursuing the Bachelor of Science 

degree program in Mechanical Engineering. Students' success in achieving these outcomes is measured 
regularly using a variety of assessment tools such as in-class problems and surveys. 

1.  Students will identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles 
of engineering, science, and mathematics; 
2.  Students will apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with 
consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, environmental, 
and economic factors; 
3.  Students will communicate effectively with a range of audiences; 
4.  Students will recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and 
make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in global, 
economic, environmental, and societal contexts; 
5. Students will function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a 
collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives; 
6. Students will develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and 
use engineering judgment to draw conclusions; and 
7. Students will acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies. 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Mechanical Engineering  

43 credits  

90 credits  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - Investigate Science 
MATH 190 Calculus I - Investigate Mathematics  
EGR 101 Introduction to Engineering - Discover Technology 
EGR 402 Engineering Design II - Senior Capstone 

Department Major Requirements  
CHEM 102 General Chemistry II - 3 credits 
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  
CHEM 104 General Chemistry Laboratory II - 1 credit 
EE 101 Circuit Analysis I - 3 credits 
EE 102 Circuit Analysis II - 3 credits 
EE 103 Circuit Analysis Laboratory I - 1 credit 
EE 104 Circuit Analysis Laboratory II - 1 credit 
EGR 401 Engineering Design I - 3 credits 
ET 204 Programming for Engineering Technology - 3 credits  
ET 405 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination I - 0 credits  

145 

 
 
 
 
 
 
ET 406 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination II - 0 credits  
MATH 210 Calculus II - 4 credits  
MATH 230 Linear Algebra I - 3 credits  
MATH 300 Calculus III - 4 credits 
MATH 310 Differential Equations - 3 credits  
MATH 330 Mathematical Statistics - 3 credits  
ME 101 Statics - 3 credits 
ME 102 Dynamics - 3 credits 
ME 212 Properties of Materials - 3 credits 
ME 213 Strength of Materials - 3 credits 
ME 214 Strength of Materials Lab - 1 credit 
ME 215 Thermodynamics I - 3 credits 
ME 315 Thermodynamics II - 3 credits 
ME 320 Kinematics of Machine Element - 4 credits 
ME 331 Engineering Design Using Pro/ENGINEER - 3 credits 
ME 405 Heat Transfer - 3 credits 
ME 406 Heat Transfer Laboratory - 1 credit 
ME 411 Fluid Mechanics - 3 credits 
ME 412 Fluid Mechanics Lab - 1 credit 
ME 416 Dynamic Systems and Vibrations - 3 credits 
ME 421 Machine Design Theory and Project - 4 credits 
ME 424 Finite Element Analysis - 3 credits 
ME 425 FEA with ANSYS - 2 credits 
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  
PHYS 104 Physics Laboratory II - 1 credit  
PHYS 201 Fundamentals of Physics I - 3 credits 
PHYS 202 Fundamentals of Physics II - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

133 credits 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Mechanical Engineering with the Theatrical 
Engineering Minor   

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
THEA 225 Theatre History I - Explore the World 
THEA 226 Theatre History II - Explore the World 
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - Investigate Science 
MATH 190 Calculus I - Investigate Mathematics  
THEA 230 Introduction to Theatre - Appreciate & Apply the Arts 
TE 101 Introduction to Theatrical Engineering - Discover Technology 
TE 402 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering II - Senior Capstone 

43 credits  

Department Major Requirements  
CHEM 102 General Chemistry II - 3 credits 

90 credits  

146 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  
CHEM 104 General Chemistry Laboratory II - 1 credit 
EE 101 Circuit Analysis I - 3 credits 
EE 102 Circuit Analysis II - 3 credits 
EE 103 Circuit Analysis Laboratory I - 1 credit 
EE 104 Circuit Analysis Laboratory II - 1 credit 
ET 204 Programming for Engineering Technology - 3 credits  
ET 405 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination I - 0 credits  
ET 406 Fundamentals of Engineering Examination II - 0 credits  
MATH 210 Calculus II - 4 credits  
MATH 230 Linear Algebra I - 3 credits  
MATH 300 Calculus III - 4 credits 
MATH 310 Differential Equations - 3 credits  
MATH 330 Mathematical Statistics - 3 credits  
ME 101 Statics - 3 credits 
ME 102 Dynamics - 3 credits 
ME 212 Properties of Materials - 3 credits 
ME 213 Strength of Materials - 3 credits 
ME 214 Strength of Materials Lab - 1 credit 
ME 215 Thermodynamics I - 3 credits 
ME 315 Thermodynamics II - 3 credits 
ME 320 Kinematics of Machine Element - 4 credits 
ME 331 Engineering Design Using Pro/ENGINEER - 3 credits 
ME 405 Heat Transfer - 3 credits 
ME 406 Heat Transfer Laboratory - 1 credit 
ME 411 Fluid Mechanics - 3 credits 
ME 412 Fluid Mechanics Lab - 1 credit 
ME 416 Dynamic Systems and Vibrations - 3 credits 
ME 421 Machine Design Theory and Project - 4 credits 
ME 424 Finite Element Analysis - 3 credits 
ME 425 FEA with ANSYS - 2 credits 
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  
PHYS 104 Physics Laboratory II - 1 credit  
PHYS 201 Fundamentals of Physics I - 3 credits 
PHYS 202 Fundamentals of Physics II - 3 credits 
TE 401 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering I - 3 credits 

Courses Required to Complete the Minor (21 Credits) 
PROD 110 Production Practicum I - 4 credits (Taken twice, 2 credits each) 
PROD 124 Fundamentals of Design and Drawing - 3 credits 
PROD 226 Scene Design I - 3 credits 
PROD 227 Lighting I - 3 credits 
PROD 229 Audio Design - 2 credits 
TE 401 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering I - 3 credits 
TE 402 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering II - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

148 credits 

147 

 
 
 
Transfer Programs in Engineering  

These programs are offered to graduates of community colleges and technical institutes who have received 
an Associate in Science or an Associate in Specialized Technology degree in areas related to Engineering. Based 
on individual evaluations, as many as 90 credits may be applied to the Bachelor of Science degree program in 
Civil, Electrical, or Mechanical Engineering.  

Funeral Service  

Point Park University in cooperation with the Pittsburgh Institute of Mortuary Science offers two programs 
in Funeral Service: a Bachelor of Science degree requiring 2-3 years of study at Point Park and one year of study 
at  the  Pittsburgh  Institute  of Mortuary  Science,  and  a  capstone  programs  requiring  study  at  the  Pittsburgh 
Institute of Mortuary Science followed by one year of study at Point Park.  

Students from mortuary schools other than the Pittsburgh Institute of Mortuary Science may enter the 
program, but their previous studies will be evaluated on an individual basis and the number of transferable 
credits cannot exceed 90, and may be considerably less than 90. The completion of additional coursework at 
Point Park University as designated by the department will be required in such instances.  

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Funeral Service  

The traditional funeral service program begins at Point Park University. After earning 72 credits at Point 
Park, you will attend PIMS to complete the 12-month, three-trimester diploma program. Upon completion of 
requirements at both schools, you will graduate with a Bachelor of Science degree. Concentrations are available 
in Health and Science or Business Administration.  

Program Objectives 

1.  Demonstrate skills and knowledge of biological sciences germane to the funeral services profession.   
2.  Demonstrate skills and knowledge of psychological sciences germane to the funeral services 

profession. 

3.  Demonstrate skills and knowledge of business management practices germane to the funeral services 

profession.  

4.  Synthesize and report experiences in embalming or similar professional activities through oral 

presentation, written reports, and/or other methods of communication.  

42 credits  

Core Requirements  
*(12 credit core equivalencies from PIMS)  
*COMM 101 Oral Communication & Presentation - 3 credits 
ENGL 101 College Composition - 3 credits 
UNIV 101 City-University Life - 3 credits 
PHIL 215 World Religions - Explore the World 
ECON 201 Principles of Economics/Macroeconomics - Explore the World 
*Investigate Mathematics - 3 credits 
Interpret Creative Works - 3 credits 
PSYC 203 Theories of Personality - Understand People - 3 credits 
PSYC 214 Psychology of Emotion Understand People - 3 credits 

148 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BMGT 234 Ethical Leadership - Succeed in Business - 3 credits 
*Appreciate & Apply the Arts - 3 credits 
*Discover Technology - 3 credits 
NSET 490 Funeral Services Capstone - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
BIOL 101 General Biology I - 3 credits 
BIOL 102 General Biology II - 3 credits 
BIOL 243 Public Health - 3 credits OR 

BIOL 334 Occupational Safety/Health - 3 credits 

BIOL 341 Environmental Health - 3 credits 
BMGT 101 Introduction to Business - 3 credits 
HRM 207 Human Resource Management - 3 credits 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits OR 

MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing - 3 credits 

PSYC 150 Psychological Foundations - 3 credits 
Two PSYC 200+ level courses - 6 credits  

30 credits  

Choose a concentration in Health and Science or Business Administration  
Health and Science  
BIOL 243 Public Health - 3 credits OR 
                 BIOL 334 Occupational Safety and Health - 3 credits  
 Two Health and Science electives (BIOL 200+, CHEM100+, PHYS 100+, FSCI 100+, NSET 120+) - 6 credits  

9 credits 

Business Administration  
MKTS 206 Professional Selling OR  

MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing - 3 credits  

Two Business Administration electives (ACCT 210+, BMGT 208+, CMPS 160+, LEAD 110+) - 6 credits 

General Elective  

Transfer Credits from an Accredited School of Mortuary Science  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

3 credits  

36 credits  
120 credits  

Capstone Program Bachelor of Science Degree  
with a major in Funeral Service  

 The capstone funeral service program follows study at the Pittsburgh Institute of Mortuary Science. After 
completing the 20-month, five-trimester Associate in Specialized Business Degree at PIMS, you will attend Point 
Park to earn 36 credits. Upon completion of requirements at both schools, you will graduate with a Bachelor 
of Science degree. Concentrations are available in Health and Science or Business Administration.  

Program Objectives  

1.  Demonstrate skills and knowledge of biological sciences germane to the funeral services profession.  
2.  Demonstrate skills and knowledge of psychological sciences germane to the funeral services 

profession.  

149 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Demonstrate skills and knowledge of business management practices germane to the funeral services 

profession.  

5.  Synthesize and report experiences in embalming or similar professional activities through oral 

presentation, written reports, and/or other methods of communication.  

Core Requirements                                                                                   

42 credits  

Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
*(24 credit core equivalencies from PIMS)  
*COMM 101 Oral Communication & Presentation - 3 credits 
*ENGL 101 College Composition - 3 credits 
*UNIV 101 City-University Life - 3 credits 
*Explore the World - 6 credits 
*Investigate Science - 3 credits 
Investigate Mathematics - 3 credits 
Interpret Creative Works – 3 credits 
PSYC 203 Theories of Personality - Understand People - 3 credits  
PSYC 214 Psychology of Emotion – Understand People - 3 credits 
BMGT 234 Ethical Leadership - Succeed in Business - 3 credits 
*Appreciate & Apply the Arts - 3 credits 
*Discover Technology - 3 credits 
NSET 490 Funeral Services Capstone - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
Two PSYC 200+ level courses - 6 credits  

6 credits  

Choose a concentration in Health and Science or Business Administration              
Health and Science  
BIOL 243 Public Health - 3 credits OR 
                 BIOL 334 Occupational Safety and Health - 3 credits  
 Two Health and Science electives (BIOL 200+, CHEM100+, PHYS 100+, FSCI 100+, NSET 120+) - 6 credits  

9 credits 

Business Administration  
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits OR 
        MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing - 3 credits 
Two Business Administration electives (ACCT 210+, BMGT 208+, CMPS 160+, LEAD 110+) - 6 credits  

General Elective  
Transfer Credits from an Accredited School of Mortuary Science  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree   120 credits 

3 credits  
84 credits  

Minors in Natural Sciences and Engineering  

The minors in the Department of Natural Sciences and Engineering listed below are available to all 

students at Point Park University. The minors consist of prerequisites plus a minimum of 18 credits.  

150 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biological Sciences Minor (18-22 credits)  
BIOL 101 General Biology I - 3 credits  
BIOL 102 General Biology II - 3 credits  
Four Biology courses (at the 200+ level) - 12-16 credits  

Chemistry Minor (19 credits) 
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - 3 credits  
CHEM 102 General Chemistry II - 3 credits  
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit 
CHEM 104 General Chemistry Laboratory II - 1 credit 
CHEM 221 Organic Chemistry - 3 credits 
CHEM 222 Organic Chemistry II - 3 credits 
CHEM 223 Organic Chemistry Laboratory - 2 credits 
CHEM 320 Biochemistry - 3 credits 

Mathematics Minor (18-20 credits)  
Prerequisite: MATH 190 Calculus I - 4 credits  
Minor: Six courses in Mathematics (at the 200+ level) - 18-20 credits.  

Mechanical Engineering - Solid Mechanics Minor (20 credits)  
ME 102 Dynamics - 3 credits 
ME 213 Strength of Materials - 3 credits 
ME 214 Strength of Materials Lab - 1 credit 
ME 320 Kinematics of Machine Element - 4 credits 
ME 421 Machine Design, Theory, and Project - 4 credits 
ME 424 Finite Element Analysis - 3 credits 
ME 425 FEA with ANSYS - 2 credits 

Mechanical Engineering - ThermoFluid Minor (19 credits)  
ME 102 Dynamics - 3 credits 
ME 215 Thermodynamics I - 3 credits 
ME 405 Heat Transfer - 3 credits 
ME 406 Heat Transfer Lab - 1 credit 
ME 411 Fluid Mechanics - 3 credits 
ME 412 Fluid Mechanics Lab - 1 credit 
ME 424 Finite Element Analysis - 3 credits 
ME 425 FEA with ANSYS - 2 credits 

Theatrical Engineering Minor (21 credits) 
Prerequisites and Co-Requisites for the minor: 12 cr. 
TE  101 Introduction to Theatrical Engineering - 3 credits 
THEA 225 Theatre History I - 3 credits 
THEA 226 Theatre History II - 3 credits 
THEA 230 Introduction to Theatre - 3 credits 

151 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Courses Required to Complete the Minor (21 Credits) 
PROD 110 Production Practicum I - 4 credits (Taken twice, 2 credits each) 
PROD 124 Fundamentals of Design and Drawing - 3 credits 
PROD 226 Scene Design I - 3 credits 
PROD 227 Lighting I - 3 credits 
PROD 229 Audio Design - 2 credits 
TE 401 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering I - 3 credits 
TE 402 Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering II - 3 credits 

The Department of Criminal Justice & Intelligence Studies  
Professors: Richard Linzer, J.D. Edward Strimlan, M.D. (Chair) 
Associate Professors: Sean Elliot Martin, Ph.D.; Mark Wintz, Ph.D. 
Senior Lecturers: Andrew Richards, M.S.; Christine Secilia, Ed.D. 

Degree programs in criminal justice, law enforcement, and intelligence and national security have garnered 
local and national attention as students are prepared for exciting careers in an ever-growing market. Programs 
integrate theory and practice, while incorporating experiential and collaborative components. Internships are 
available for those students seeking to enrich their academic programs through real-world experiences. Our 
faculty includes current practitioners and those with extensive backgrounds in the field.  

Program in Criminal Justice  

The program in Criminal Justice offers students a focused interdisciplinary exposure to all aspects of crime 
and criminal justice. Courses in the program deal with crime, violence, and other forms of deviance and the 
responses to these problems by police, courts, and corrections officials; contemporary criminal justice issues; as 
well as ethical concerns and research. The goals of the Criminal Justice Programs at Point Park University are 
to prepare students for careers in law enforcement, corrections, private security, and other related fields. Since 
the emphasis is upon history, sociology, law, and the workings of government agencies, the programs provide 
students with an excellent background for further study in graduate school, as well as entry into law school. 
Students are encouraged to enroll in a one-semester practicum in a law enforcement agency as part of their 
studies.  

Bachelor of Science with a major in Criminal Justice  

Program Objectives  

1.  Explain how professionals across multiple fields within the Criminal Justice system work to 

eliminate implicit, explicit, or institutional bias from their work. 

2.  Trace the history of law enforcement, the American court system, and corrections with special 

attention to their position within the larger field of Criminal Justice Studies. 

3.  Apply Criminal Theory to examine the nature and causes of crime, typologies, offenders, and 

victims. 

4.  Appraise the ethical behaviors of professionals within the context of case studies and simulations to 

support the development of appropriate ethical practices. 

5.  Evaluate the range of criminal justice procedures, techniques, and legal requirements in the criminal 
justice system. Evaluate the most effective application in utilizing accepted sources, methods, and 
techniques of the various elements to attain the criminal justice system goals. 

152 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Requirements  
CRMJ 400 Transnational Criminal Activities (Capstone) 

Department Major Requirements  
CRMJ 150 Introduction to Criminal Justice - 3 credits  
CRMJ 201 Constitutional Law for Law Enforcement - 3 credits 
CRMJ 230 Professional Responsibilities - 3 credits 
CRMJ 250 Criminal Law and Procedure - 3 credits  
CRMJ 251 Criminology - 3 credits  
CRMJ 254 Juvenile Justice - 3 credits 
CRMJ 261 The Courts and Criminal Trial - 3 credits 
CRMJ 262 Corrections, Probation and Parole - 3 credits  
CRMJ 361 Criminal Evidence - 3 credits  
CRMJ 362 Criminal Investigation - 3 credits  
FSCI 370 Forensic Evidence I - 3 credits 

Department Electives  
Choose five:  
CRMJ 220 Professional Communications in Criminal Justice - 3 credits 
CRMJ 290 History of Organized Crime - 3 credits 
CRMJ 305 Joint Task Force - 3 credits 
CRMJ 313 Sex Crimes Investigation - 3 credits 
CRMJ 330 Risk Assessment and Investigation - 3 credits 
CRMJ 352 Fraud Investigations - 3 credits 
CRMJ 396 Act 120 (18) or Correctional Academy (10)** 
CRMJ 403 Federal Law Enforcement - 3 credits 
CRMJ 404 International Criminal Law - 3 credits 
CRMJ 455 Criminal Justice Internship - 3 credits  
CRMJ 470 Criminal Profiling - 3 credits  
FSCI 371 Forensic Evidence - 3 credits 

**Certificate of completion required 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

42 credits  

33 credits  

15 credits  

30 credits  
120 credits  

5-Year Bachelor of Science/Master of Science Degree with a Major in Criminal Justice*  
*This Program no longer offered as of Fall 2024. 

Intelligence and National Security  

The Bachelor of Science in Intelligence and National Security provides a solid foundation for the planning, 
implementation, and management of security operations in government and non-governmental arenas. With 

153 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
focus on issues in national security, intelligence operations, emergency services, covert operations, and crisis 
management, students will be well prepared for entry-level positions in government and private sectors.  

The  Bachelor  of  Science  in  Intelligence  and  National  Security  degree  program  is  designed  to  provide 
students  with  entry-level  career  opportunities  in  the  field  of  intelligence  and  national  security.  This 
baccalaureate program provides broad-based coursework that includes core courses, electives, and departmental 
requirements  and  electives.  Critical  thinking,  analytical  skills,  communications,  ethical  behavior,  decision 
making, technological skills, and strategic thinking are woven throughout the curriculum.  

Bachelor of Science with a major in Intelligence and National Security  

Program Objectives  

1.  Offer clear and concise oral and written intelligence reports based on the formats, content, and style 

of declassified reports from the Intelligence Community. 

2.  Apply critical thinking in order to collect, analyze, and interpret information by using accepted 

methods from the Intelligence Community. This includes the use of link chart analysis software and 
other methods and tools of the Intelligence Community. 

3.  Define domestic and international terrorism and describe and analyze terrorist organizations, their 

structures, motivations, methods, financing, and global effect on international policies.  

4.  Describe, evaluate, and analyze the history of U.S. Intelligence, its evolution in the U.S., and its 

effect on national policies. 

5.  List, describe, and evaluate a range of Intelligence tradecraft techniques and the sources and 
methods of the “dark arts.” Students will also assess the most effective application of various 
tradecraft techniques to attain specific Intelligence goals. 

Core Requirements  
INTL 410 The President’s Daily Brief – Senior Capstone  

Departmental Major Requirements  
CRMJ 403 Federal Law Enforcement - 3 credits  
INTL 101 Introduction to Intelligence - 3 credits  
INTL 102 Intelligence Tradecraft Techniques - 3 credits  
INTL 210 Terrorism - 3 credits  
INTL 211 Evolution of Intelligence - 3 credits 
INTL 300 Critical Thinking for Analysts - 3 credits  
INTL 301 Integrated Intelligence Analysis - 3 credits  
INTL 302 National Intelligence Authorities - 3 credits  
INTL 305 Intelligence Failures - 3 credits  
INTL 310 Ethics of Spying - 3 credits  
INTL 405 Counter Intelligence - 3 credits 
INTL 406 Methods of Propaganda and Persuasion- 3 credits 

Departmental Major Electives  
Choose 4 courses:  
INTL 204 Intelligence in the Media - 3 credits  
INTL 306 Emergency Planning & Security Measures - 3 credits 
INTL 312 Interrogation Techniques - 3 credits  

154 

42 credits  

36 credits 

12 credits 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTL 315 Intelligence Internship I - 3 credits  
INTL 402 Current Issues in U.S. Security Policy - 3 credits  
INTL 407 World Conflicts- 3 credits 
INTL 408 Generations of Warfare-3 credits 
INTL 409 Intelligence Case Studies - 3 credits 
INTL 411 Threat Analysis- 3 credits 
INTL 415 Intelligence Internship II - 3 credits  

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree 

30 credits  
120 credits  

Forensic Science  

The  forensic  science  program  is  geared  toward  preparing  the  student  for  work  in  most  sections  of  the 

forensic laboratory, including trace, drugs, arson, toxicology, death investigations, and work with DNA.  

Bachelor of Science with a major in Forensic Science  

Program Objectives  

1.  Explain how professionals within the field of Forensic Science work to eliminate implicit, explicit, or 

institutional bias from their work. 

2.  Apply crime scene processing techniques to collect, document, and preserve evidence. 
3.  Analyze gathered evidence, including statistical data and criminological theory, to identify patterns or 

correlations that may assist in the reconstruction of events. 

4.  Use quantitative skills to contextualize the relevance of evidence that has been collected, documented, 

preserved, or analyzed. 

5.  Appraise  the  ethical  behaviors  of  professionals  within  the  context  of  case-studies  and  lab-based 
simulations in order to support the development of appropriate ethical practices within the field. 

42 credits  

37 credits  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
CHEM 101 General Chemistry - Investigate Science 
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
FSCI 401 Ethics in Forensic Science - Capstone 

Departmental Requirements (Natural Sciences)  
BIOL 101 General Biology I - 3 credits  
BIOL 102 General Biology II - 3 credits  
BIOL 103 General Biology Laboratory I - 1 credit  
BIOL 104 General Biology Laboratory II - 1 credit  
BIOL 225 Anatomy and Physiology I - 4 credits  
BIOL 226 Anatomy and Physiology II - 4 credits  
CHEM 102 General Chemistry II - 3 credits 
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  

155 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHEM 104 General Chemistry Laboratory II - 1 credit  
CHEM 221 Organic Chemistry - 3 credits  
CHEM 222 Organic Chemistry II - 3 credits  
CHEM 223 Organic Chemistry Lab - 2 credits 
PHYS 101 Physics I - 3 credits  
PHYS 102 Physics II - 3 credits  
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  
PHYS 104 Physics Laboratory II - 1 credit  

Departmental Major Requirements  
BIOL 222 Intro to Genetics- 4 credits 
BIOL 320 Biochemistry - 3 credits  
BIOL 350 Molecular/Cellular Biology - 4 credits  
CRMJ 150 Introduction to Criminal Justice - 3 credits 
CRMJ 315 Quantitative Methods for Law Professionals OR  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  

CRMJ 361 Criminal Evidence - 3 credits  
FSCI 100 Development of the Death Investigation System - 3 credits  
FSCI 301 Accident/Suicide Death Investigation - 3 credits  
FSCI 370 Forensic Evidence I - 3 credits  
FSCI 371 Forensic Evidence II - 3 credits  
FSCI 402 Natural Death Investigation - 3 credits  

Departmental Major Electives  
Select one of the following:  
CRMJ 470 Crime Scene and Criminal Profiling - 3 credits  
FSCI 300 Forensic Photography - 3 credits 
FSCI 455 Internship in Forensic Science - 3 credits  
MATH 190 Calculus - 4 credits*  
PSYC 245 Introduction to Forensic Psychology - 3 credits  

35 credits  

3-4 credits  

*Calculus is recommended for any student planning to take the MCAT, though it is not required.  

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

3 credits  
120-121 credits  

Minors in Criminal Justice and Intelligence Studies  

Criminal Justice Minor (18 credits) 
Requirements (6 credits) 
CRMJ 150 Introduction to Criminal Justice - 3 credits 
CRMJ 201 Constitutional Law for Law Enforcement  - 3 credits 
CRMJ (choose four courses) - 12 credits 

156 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intelligence and National Security Minor (18 credits) 
Requirements (6 credits) 
INTL 101 Introduction to Intelligence - 3 credits 
INTL 102 Intelligence Tradecraft Techniques - 3 credits 
Choose 4 INTL courses (12 credits) 

Forensic Science Minor (18 credits) 
CRMJ 150 Introduction to Criminal Justice- 3 credits 
FSCI 100 Development of the Death Investigation System- 3 credits 
FSCI 301 Accident/Suicide Death Investigation- 3 credits 
FSCI 370 Forensic Evidence I- 3 credits 
FSCI 371 Forensic Evidence II- 3 credits 
FSCI 401 Ethics in Forensic Science- 3 credits 

Graduate Studies    

The Department of Criminal Justice and Intelligent Studies offers one graduate degree: a Master of Arts 

in Intelligence and Global Security.   

For a graduate catalog or information, visit the website or please call (412) 392-3808. 

157 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rowland School of Business  
Stephen Tanzilli, J.D., Dean 

Department of Business Analytics and Technology 
B.S. Accounting  
Post Baccalaureate B.S. Accounting 
B.S. Applied Computer Science 
B.S. Economics and Finance  

Department of Community Engagement and Leadership 
B.A. Organizational Leadership  
B.S. Public Administration 
Certificate in Emergency Medical Services Administration 
Certificate in Fire Service Administration 
Certificate in Public Administration  

Department of Management 
B.S. Aviation Management 
B.S. Business Management 
Post Baccalaureate B.S. Business Management 
B.S. Business Administration 
B.S. Entrepreneurship & Innovation 
B.S. Human Resource Management  
Post Baccalaureate B.S. Human Resource Management  
B.S. Marketing and Sales  
Post Baccalaureate B.S. Marketing and Sales 
Certificate in Business Management 
Certificate in Marketing 
Certificate in Digital Marketing 
Certificate in Professional Sales 

Department of Sports, Arts, Entertainment and Music Business 
B.S. Sports, Arts, Entertainment and Music Business 
B.S. Sports Management 

The  Rowland  School  of  Business  offers  programs  in  ten  major  areas  of  study:  Accounting;  Applied 
Computer  Science;  Business  Management/Business  Administration;  Community  Engagement;  Economics 
and  Finance;  Human  Resource  Management;  Marketing  and  Sales;  Organizational  Leadership;  Public 
Administration; and Sports, Arts, Entertainment and Music Business. The School’s broadly based programs 
include  required  coursework  in  the  liberal  arts  and  sciences,  assuring  students  receive  a  sound  general 
education along with the specialized training required for a career. The courses offered provide students with 
an understanding of the economic, social, and political problems of today for application in various fields of 
business and public administration. These programs include specialized training designed to produce future 
business and public leaders who are equipped with the latest knowledge in their technical fields and are fully 
aware of their responsibilities as ethical leaders in the community.  

The  School  of  Business’  programs  enable  graduates  to  pursue  advanced  degrees.  Please  refer  to  the 
graduate  catalog  for  information  about  our  M.B.A.,  Master  of  Science  in  Healthcare  Administration  and 

158 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management,  Master  of  Science  in  Information  Systems  and  Business  Analytics,  and  Master  of  Arts  in 
Organizational Leadership programs, as well as out Ph.D. in Community Engagement.  

The Department of Business Analytics and Technology 
Professors:   Cheryl Clark, M.B.A., C.P.A. (Chair); Dimitris Kraniou, Ph.D.; Archish Maharaja, C.P.A., 
Ed.D.  
Associate Professors: Jayne Olshanski, M.B.A. C.P.A; Luis Palacios-Salguero, Ph.D.; Mark Voortman, Ph.D.; 
Jeffrey Seaman, M.I.S 
Assistant Professors: Amy Cesario, M.B.A., C.P.A.; Diogo Oliveira, Ph.D. 
Senior Lecturer: Joseph DeFazio, Ph.D. 
Professor Emeritus/Emerita: Margaret Gilfillan, M.B.A., C.P.A.; Angela Isaac, Ph.D.; Andrea Wachter, 
M.A.T., M.P.M., M.T.   

Accounting  

The program in Accounting leading to the Bachelor of Science degree is designed to prepare students for 
careers in accounting and includes those courses in management and applied computer science that contribute 
to this goal. For accounting majors interested in pursuing graduate work, credit for six undergraduate credits 
will be given in the M.B.A. program (please refer to the Graduate Catalog). Aspiring CPA’s in Pennsylvania are 
required to have a baccalaureate or higher degree with a completion of 150 credit hours, including a total of at 
least  36  semester  credits  of  accounting  and  auditing,  business  law,  finance,  and  tax  subjects.  This  dual 
B.S./M.B.A. not only fulfills this requirement, but also provides the individual with a master’s degree.  

A post-baccalaureate program requiring a total of 48 credits and leading to the Bachelor of Science degree 
is available to students with baccalaureate degrees in other areas. This program, which requires a minimum 
expenditure  of  time,  is  attractive  to  mature  students  who  want  to  prepare  for  a  career  in  accounting. 
Prerequisites for this program include four courses (12 credits): ECON 201, 202; MATH 175, 180.  

Program Objectives 

1.  Critical Thinking: Analyze information to facilitate decision making.  
2.  Management & Leadership: Analyze the role of motivation and influence in achieving the goals of 

accounting and financial reporting. 

3.  Communication: Employ communication skills to deliver clear and organized information, including 

accepted professional methods such as financial statements and reporting.  

4.  Business Knowledge: Apply major concepts within the traditional areas of accounting. 
5.  Business Environment: Apply professional accounting ethical standards with a diverse global 

environment. 
Analysis and Technology Utilization: Apply information technology tools to meet the needs and 
expectations of the workplace. 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Accounting  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience - Senior Capstone 

42 credits  

159 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
***Recommended University Core Curriculum  
Explore the World: ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics 
Succeed in Business: ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics 
Discover Technology: CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science 

C = Taken in University Core 

Business Core Requirements  
MATH 180 College Algebra - C 
ACCT 210 Intro to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 
CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Principles Of Microeconomics*** - 3 credits 
FIN 200 Introduction to Financial Management - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience - C 

Department Major Requirements 
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science*** - 3 credits 
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
ACCT 220 Managerial Accounting - 3 credits 
ACCT 230 Accounting Information Systems - 3 credits 
ACCT 310 Intermediate Financial Accounting I - 3 credits 
ACCT 311 Intermediate Financial Accounting II - 3 credits 
ACCT 312 Intermediate Financial Accounting II - 3 credits 
ACCT 350 Federal Taxation I - 3 credits 
ACCT 410 Adv. Accounting Theory - 3 credits 
ACCT 440 Auditing I - 3 credits 
ACCT 450 Federal Taxation II - 3 credits 
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics*** - 3 credits 
BMGT 202 Business Law II - 3 credits 
BMGT 221 Business Communication & Research - 3 credits 

21 credits  

54 credits 

Select 4 courses in Accounting, Applied Computer Science, Business Management, Economics, Finance, or 
Mathematics.  
(MATH 190 Calculus is recommended if Graduate Study is anticipated) Directed Electives - 12 credits  

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

3 credits  
120 credits  

Post-Baccalaureate Program Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Accounting  

Prerequisites to the Program:  
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics - 3 credits  
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  

160 

12 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48 credits  

MATH 180 College Algebra - 3 credits  

Department Major Requirements  
ACCT 210 Introduction to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
ACCT 220 Management Accounting for Decision Makers - 3 credits 
ACCT 230 Accounting Information Systems - 3 credits 
ACCT 310 Intermediate Accounting I - 3 credits 
ACCT 311 Intermediate Accounting II - 3 credits 
ACCT 312 Intermediate Accounting II - 3 credits 
ACCT 350 Federal Taxation I - 3 credits 
ACCT 410 Advanced Accounting Theory - 3 credits 
ACCT 440 Auditing I - 3 credits 
ACCT 450 Federal Taxation II - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits  
BMGT 202 Business Law II - 3 credits  
FIN 200 Introduction to Financial Management - 3 credits 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone) - 3 credits 
CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
Computer Science elective - 3 credits  

Minimum credits for B.S. degree 

48 credits  

Economics and Finance  

Economics  deals “with  the ordinary business  of life”  and as such, its subject matter  should be  directly 
relevant to students who are preparing to enter the economy and to understand the implications of economic 
events for their own lives and livelihoods. The study of finance provides students with an understanding of 
how financial  markets operate and how to make  effective  investment and  financial  decisions for firms and 
individuals. Financial markets are the major conduits through which investments are channeled in the global 
marketplace. The significance of this is paramount given the international dimensions of our economy.  

Program Objectives 

1.  Clearly communicate thoughts and ideas both verbally and in writing using economic and financial 

terminology.  

2.  Apply information technology tools, and economic and financial analytical tools and techniques to 

meet the needs and expectations of the workplace. 

3.  Apply major economic and financial theories and concepts in traditional business areas in order to 

improve the performance of the organization. 

4.  Apply professional, ethical, legal, and economic and financial standards within a diverse global 

environment. 

5.  Analyze complex information to produce findings that facilitate management decision-making. 
6.  Analyze problems of organizational leadership by using economic and financial knowledge in order 

to improve the use of motivation and influence in achieving a coordinated goal. 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Economics and Finance  

Core Requirements  

42 credits  

161 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone) 

Recommended University Core Curriculum  
Explore the World: ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics 
Discover Technology: CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science 

Business Core Requirements  
ACCT 210 Introduction to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 
CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Principles of Econ/Microecon - 3 credits 
FIN 200 Introduction to Financial Management - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 

21 credits  

Department Major Requirements    

51 credits 

Select two courses from the following:  
BMGT 221 Business Communication and Research - 3 credits 
PRAD 206 Introduction to PR/AD - 3 credits 
POLS 205 World Geography - 3 credits  
POLS 207 Public Policy Issues - 3 credits  

Required courses: 
ACCT 220 Management Accounting for Decision Makers - 3 credits 
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits* 
ECON 201 Principles of Economics/Macroeconomics - 3 credits* 
ECON 205 Survey of Economic Thought - 3 credits 
ECON 310 Intermediate Price Theory - 3 credits 
ECON 421 International Economics - 3 credits 
FIN 306 Economics of Money & Banking - 3 credits 
FIN 426 Investments - 3 credits 
FIN 431 International Finance - 3 credits 
FIN 461 Risk Management - 3 credits 
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 

*Courses that can be taken in the University Core allowing for a Major Course Substitution of your 
choosing 
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits 
ECON 201 Principles of Economics/Macroeconomics - 3 credits 

Select 12 credits from the following:  
BMGT 208 Principles of Management - 3 credits 
ECON 203 Economic History of the US - 3 credits 
ECON 350 ECON Internship I - 3 credits 

162 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECON 380 ECON Cooperative Education I - 3 credits 
ECON 395 Special Topics in Economics - 3 credits 
ECON 405 Comparative Economic Systems - 3 credits 
ECON 417 Economic Growth and Development - 3 credits 
ECON 418 Modern Economic Thought - 3 credits 
ECON 419 Economics of Social Issues - 3 credits 
ECON 460 ECON Internship II - 3 credits 
ECON 462 ECON Internship III - 3 credits 
ECON 480 ECON Cooperative Education II - 3 credits 
ECON 496 Independent Study in Economics - 3 credits 
PADM 301 Operational Methods for Public Management - 3 credits 

General Electives  
(MATH 190 Calculus is recommended if Graduate Study is anticipated.) 
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

6 credits  

120 credits  

Applied Computer Science 

Point Park University was one of the first in the nation to offer a Bachelor of Science degree in Computer 
Science and is now the first university in the Pittsburgh region to offer an Applied Computer Science degree 
(previously known as Information Technology). From the  earliest days of  the program, the  department has 
continued to upgrade the curriculum to reflect the rapid pace of change in this ever-expanding field. The latest 
updates to this degree formally introduced concentrations with an emphasis on developing the fundamental 
hands-on  skills  required  to  be  competitive  in  the  ever-changing  world  of  computer  technology.  The  degree 
consists of 42 credits from the University Core, 31 credits from the School of Business Core, 21 credits from 
the Applied Computer Science core, and 27 credits of major and general electives, totaling 121 credits. Students 
may  complete  a  unique  combination  of  major  elective  courses  or  focus  their  studies  on  one  of  three 
concentrations: (1) Software Development, (2) Big Data and Analytics, or (3) Networking and Security.  

The Applied Computer Science degree is currently offered in two modalities: traditional on-ground and 
online. The  requirements for both are exactly the same; however, online courses are offered in an  8 weeks 
accelerated format versus 15 weeks for on-ground delivery. 

Program Objectives 

1.  Critical Thinking: Analyze data to facilitate decision making.  
2.  Teamwork: Collaborate productively in a team setting by utilizing collaboration tools.  
3.  Communication: Clearly communicate thoughts and ideas both verbally and in writing.  
4.  Business Knowledge: Apply major Applied Computer Science concepts within the traditional areas of 

business. 

5.  Business Environment: Apply professional, ethical, and legal standards within a diverse global 

environment. 

6.  Analysis & Technology Utilization: Apply Applied Computer Science tools and techniques to meet 

the needs and expectations of the workplace.  

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Applied Computer Science (formerly IT) 
Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 

42 credits  

163 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CMPS 480 Senior Project - Senior Capstone 

Recommended University Core Curriculum  
Explore the World: ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics 
Discover Technology: CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science 

Business Core Requirements  
ACCT 210 Introduction to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 
CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Principles of Economics/Microeconomics - 3 credits 
FIN 200 Introduction to Financial Management - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
ACCT 220 Management Accounting for Decision Makers - 3 credits 
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits* 
CMPS 160 Databases - 3 credits 
CMPS 161 Networking and Security - 3 credits 
CMPS 162 Introduction to Programming - 3 credits 
CMPS 260 Data Structures - 3 credits 
CMPS 261 Server Management - 3 credits 
CMPS 262 Advanced Programming - 3 credits 
ECON 201 Principles of Economics/Macroeconomics - 3 credits* 
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 

21 credits  

48 credits 

*Courses that can be taken in the University Core allowing for a Major Course Substitution of your 
choosing 
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits 
ECON 201 Principles of Economics/Macroeconomics - 3 credits 

Either choose 18 credits from the following:  
BMGT 380 Cooperative Education I - 6 credits 
BMGT 480 Cooperative Education II - 6 credits 
CMPS 295 Special Topics in CMPS I - 3 credits 
CMPS 296 Independent Study in CMPS I - 3 credits 
CMPS 355 Internship in Computer Science I - 3 credits 
CMPS 356 Internship in Computer Science II - 3 credits 
CMPS 360 Survey of Programming Languages - 3 credits 
CMPS 361 Web Application Development - 3 credits 
CMPS 362 Networking - 3 credits 
CMPS 363 Digital Security - 3 credits 
CMPS 364 NoSQL Databases - 3 credits 
CMPS 395 Special Topics in CMPS II - 3 credits 
CMPS 396 Independent Study in CMPS II - 3 credits 
CMPS 460 Mobile Application Development - 3 credits 

164 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CMPS 461 Big Data Applications - 3 credits 
CMPS 462 Data Mining - 3 credits 
CMPS 495 Special Topics in CMPS III - 3 credits 
CMPS 496 Independent Study in CMPS III - 3 credits 
Or complete the Software Development Concentration (18 credits): 
CMPS 360, CMPS 361, CMPS 460, and 9 CPMS elective credits 
Or complete the Big Data and Analytics Concentration (18 credits): 
CMPS 364, CMPS 461, CMPS 462, and 9 CMPS elective credits 
Or complete the Networking and Security Concentration (18 credits): 
CMPS 362, CMPS 363, and 12 CMPS elective credits 

General Electives 
(MATH 190 Calculus is recommended if Graduate Study is anticipated.) 
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

9 credits 

120 credits 

The Department of Community Engagement and Leadership 
Professor: Heather Starr Fiedler, Ph.D.; Teresa Gregory, M.F.A.; Robert Skertich, Ph.D.  
Assistant Professor: Shamayeta Bhattacharya, Ph.D.; Tahirah Walker, Ph.D. (Chair) 

Community Engagement & Leadership is an interdisciplinary department that prepares scholars and 

practitioners to work in partnership with government, civic, business, and community organizations to 
become agents of change in diverse settings. The department supports nonprofit and community partners 
and serves as a hub for university volunteerism, service learning, and partnership in order to have a positive 
effect on the lives of our graduates and communities. The Department of Community Engagement and 
Leadership offers academic programs including the Bachelor of Science (B.S.) in Public Administration; 
Bachelor of Arts (B.A.) and Master of Arts in Organizational Leadership (M.A.O.L.); and undergraduate 
minors in Emergency Management Services, Fire Administration, Public Administration, and Nonprofit 
Leadership. The department also is home to interdisciplinary programs including the Ph.D. in Community 
Engagement and the minors in Women’s & Gender Studies and Community Engagement & Social Change. 

Organizational Leadership  

The Organizational Leadership program is designed to enable students to develop their knowledge, skills, 
and proficiencies in a changing job market and contribute to the success of the businesses, non-profits, and 
governmental agencies that employ them.   

The Bachelor of Arts degree in Organizational Leadership in the Rowland School of Business at Point 
Park University offers students the opportunity to study the fields of leadership and develop the requisite skills 
organizations are seeking. In addition to seminal and contemporary theories, many of the concepts, tools, and 
techniques  emerging 
include: 
interpersonal and organizational communication skills, strategic decision-making, cross-cultural perspectives, 
and  community  leadership  as  well  as  research  methods  for  organizational  studies  and/or  community-based 
concerns.  

introduced.  Interdisciplinary-based  courses 

leadership  studies  are 

in 

Program Objectives 

1.  Clearly communicate thoughts and ideas both verbally and in writing. 

165 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Apply information technology tools and techniques to meet the needs and expectations of the 

workplace. 

3.  Analyze, integrate, and communicate complex information to facilitate management decision-

making. 

4.  Gather, analyze, and evaluate critical information from within organizational leadership. 
5.  Apply major concepts within traditional areas of business management. 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Organizational Leadership  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone)  
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics - Explore the World 
PADM 210 Public Administration - Explore the World 

42 credits  

45 credits  

Program Requirements  
BMGT 101 Introduction to Business - 3 credits  
BMGT 221 Business Communications & Research - 3 credits 
BMGT 234 Ethical Leadership - 3 credits 
BMGT 303 International Business - 3 credits 
BMGT 417 Strategic Planning - 3 credits 
CMPS 214 Microcomputing I - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - 3 credits 
HRM 207 Human Resource Management - 3 credit 
PADM 308 Theories of Public Organizations - 3 credits OR  
BMGT 340 Org Behav. w/Topics in Mgt. - 3 credits 
LEAD 110 Introduction to the Study of Leadership - 3 credits 
LEAD 312 Leadership Confluence of Emotional and Cultural Acumen - 3 credits  
LEAD 315 Leading Organizational Change - 3 credits  
LEAD 317 Understanding Gender and Power; Gender Dynamics in Leadership - 3 credits  
LEAD 415 Systems Thinking for Emerging Leaders - 3 credits  
LEAD 445 Career Development and Succession Strategies for Leaders - 3 credits  

18 credits 

Choose a concentration: 
Nonprofit Leadership:  
PADM 206 Nonprofit Organizations - 3 credits 
PADM 214 Public Budget and Finance I - 3 credits 
PADM 317 Legal Aspects of Nonprofit Organizations - 3 credits 
SAEM 325 Essential Fundraising Principles - 3 credits 
PADM 405 Leading Nonprofit Organizations - 3 credits 
Select One of the following: 
PADM 311 Employee Relations in Public Organizations - 3 credits 
PADM 314 Public Budget and Finance II - 3 credits 
ACCT 460 Nonprofit Accounting - 3 credits 
PADM 411 Internship - 3 credits 
SAEM 350 Internship - 3 credits 

166 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CENG 250 Advocacy and Social Change - 3 credits 
SJS 225 Intro to Grant Writing - 3 credits 

General Leadership: 
Select 18 credits of RSOB 300+ level courses. 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

Public Administration  

15 credits  
120 credits  

The  Bachelor  of  Science  degree  programs  in  Public  Administration  prepares  graduates  for  careers  in 
government agencies and nonprofit organizations, as well as in regulated businesses and as private government 
contractors.  These  programs  also  provide  current  public  employees  with  an  opportunity  to  expand  their 
education and to seek promotions.  The Bachelor of Science degree in Public Administration is offered online. 
Students may use departmental and General Electives to complete a double major or one or more minors.  

The baccalaureate program includes a 21-credit concentration in one of three subject areas: general public 
administration,  Fire  Service  Administration,  Law  Enforcement  Administration,  and  Emergency  Medical 
Services Administration. The Fire Service Administration courses are recognized by the National Fire Academy 
Fire and Emergency Services Higher Education (FESHE) project. The concentrations can be taken as stand-
alone certificates and as minors for other degrees. A nonprofit management minor is also available. 

Program Objectives 

1.  Critical Thinking/Problem Solving: Students will demonstrate an ability to obtain and process 

information to facilitate management decision-making.  

2.  Communication: Students will deliver effective communication using a variety of in-person and 

digital methods.  

3.  Business Knowledge/Theory and Practice: Students will apply major concepts within the traditional 

areas of business.  

4.  Analysis & Technology Utilization: Students will utilize information technology tools and analytical 

tools to enhance business decision making. 

5.  Business Environment: Students will demonstrate an ability to apply their knowledge of ethical, 

legal, economic, and global environments and ascertain their impact. 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Public Administration  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone)  

42 credits  

Department Major Requirements                                                                                    
Choose four ACCT, BMGT, HRM, or LEAD courses - 12 credits                                                                        
BMGT 208 Public Administration - 3 credits  
PADM 206 Nonprofit Organizations - 3 credits 
PADM 211 Principles of Management - 3 credits 
PADM 214 Public Budgeting and Finance I - 3 credits 

48 credits      

167 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PADM 303 Policy and Decision Analysis - 3 credits 
PADM 311 Special Employee Relations in Public Agencies OR 

PADM 335 Personnel Management for Fire Emergency Services - 3 credits  

Select One Concentration: 
General (18 credits) 
Six PADM courses at the 300+ level - 18 credits 

Emergency Medical Services (18 credits) 
PADM 340 Foundations of EMS - 3 credits 
PADM 341 EMS Management - 3 credits 
PADM 336 Community Planning & Risk Reduction - 3 credits 
PADM 345 EMS Safety and Risk Management - 3 credits 
PADM 331 Political and Legal Foundations of Fire Protection - 3 credits 
PADM 440 EMS Quality and Performance Management - 3 credits 

Fire Service Administration (18 credits) 
PADM 330 Fire and Emergency Services Administration - 3 credits 
PADM 331 Political and Legal Foundations of Fire Protection - 3 credits 
PADM 332 Fire Prevention Organization and Management - 3 credits 
PADM 336 Community Risk Reduction for Fire and Emergency Services - 3 credits 
PADM 430 Applications of Fire Research - 3 credits 
PADM 300+ level course - 3 credits 

Law Enforcement Administration (18 credits) 
Select six of the following: 
CRMJ 300/400 level course (up to 6) 
INTL 304 Critical Issues in Risk Communication - 3 credits 
INTL 401 High Impact Event Planning - 3 credits 
Any PADM 300+ elective - 3 credits 
Any INTL 300+ elective - 3 credits 

General Electives  
(Students may use general electives to complete a double major or one or more minors.)  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

30 credits 

120 credits 

18 credits 

Certificate in Public Administration 
Requirements  
PADM 210 Public Administration - 3 credits 
PADM 211 Principles of Management OR 

BMGT 208 Principles of Management - 3 credits 

PADM 214 Public Budgeting and Finance I - 3 credits 
Select 3 courses in Public Administration at the 200+ level - 9 credits 

Certificate in Emergency Medical Services 

168 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Requirements  
PADM 340 Foundations of EMS - 3 credits 
PADM 341 EMS Management - 3 credits 
PADM 342 EMS Community Risk Reduction - 3 credits 
PADM 345 EMS Safety and Risk Management - 3 credits 
PADM 346 Legal, Political and Regulatory Issues in EMS - 3 credits 
PADM 440 EMS Quality and Performance Management - 3 credits 

Certificate in Fire Service Administration 
Requirements  
PADM 330 Fire and Emergency Services Administration - 3 credits 
PADM 331 Political and Legal Foundations of Fire Protection - 3 credits 
PADM 332 Fire Prevention Organization and Management - 3 credits 
PADM 335 Personnel Management for Fire and Emergency Services OR 

PADM 311 Special Employee Relations - 3 credits 

PADM 336 Community Risk Reduction for Fire and Emergency Services - 3 credits 
PADM 430 Applications of Fire Research - 3 credits 

18 credits 

18 credits 

The Department of Management 
Professors:  William Breslove, Ph.D.; George C. Bromall, J.D.; Dorene Ciletti, Ph.D.; Helena Knorr, Ph.D.; 
Michele Fyola, Ph.D.; Elaine Luther, D.Sc.  
Associate Professors: Sandra Mervosh, M.S. (Chair); Patrick Mulvihill, D.Ed. 
Assistant Professor: R. Hagen Starz, J.D. 
Professor Emeritus: Soren Hogsgaard, M.A; Charles Perkins, Ph.D.; Edward Wachter, J.D. 

Business Management  

Both  industry  and  government  emphasize  a  professional  approach  to  management,  indicating  the 
complexity  of  today’s  decision-making  processes.  The  program  in  Business  Management,  leading  to  the 
Bachelor of Science degree, prepares students for management careers or advanced study. The major includes 
a  15-credit  concentration  in  one  of  the  following  areas:  General  Management,  Entrepreneurship,  or 
International Business.  

Students with a baccalaureate degree in another area may expand their career base by completion of a 45-
credit  post-baccalaureate  program  leading  to  the  Bachelor  of  Science  degree.  Prerequisites for  this  program 
include four courses (12 credits):  ECON 201, 202; MATH 175, 180.   

Program Objectives 

1.  Critically evaluate internal and external information to enhance decision-making (Analysis & 

Technology Utilization). 

2.  Employ professional communication skills (Communication).  
3.  Develop creative problem-solving solutions based on best practices (Critical Thinking). 
4.  Develop a best practice mindset for directing and contributing to initiatives and processes within the 

organization (Management & Leadership). 

5.  Develop a comprehensive knowledge of business processes, laws, and best practices for the 

application of business concepts (Business Knowledge). 

169 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.  Apply inclusive and ethical management practices within a national and global environment 

(Business Environment). 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Business Management  

42 credits  

21 credits  

30 credits  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone) 

Recommended University Core Curriculum 
Explore the World: ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics 
Investigate Math: MATH 180 College Algebra 
Discover Technology: CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science 

Business Core Requirements  
ACCT 210 Intro to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - 3 credits 
FIN 200 Intro to Financial Management - 3 credits 
CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits OR 

BMGT 338 Quantitative Analysis for Decision Making - 3 credits 

HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
BMGT 101 Introduction to Business- 3 credits 
BMGT 202 Business Law II - 3 credits  
BMGT 208 Principles of Management - 3 credits  
BMGT 275 Applied Leadership - 3 credits  
BMGT 303 International Business - 3 credits 
BMGT 342 Research Methods in a Business Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits 
ACCT 220 Managerial Accounting - 3 credits 
Business Elective - 3 credits 

Experiential Learning 
3 credits 
A minimum of 3 credits earned through the completion of Internship, Cooperative Education, Study 
Abroad, or other immersive experience approved by the department. 

Choose a Concentration in General Management, Entrepreneurship, or International Business:  

General Management (15 credits)  
HRM 316 Labor/Management Relations - 3 credits 
BMGT 312 Business Negotiation - 3 credits  
Business Elective - 9 credits 

170 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Entrepreneurship (15 Credits)  
BMGT 332 Introduction to Entrepreneurship - 3 credits  
BMGT 336 Entrepreneurial Regulation - 3 credits  
MKTS 320 Creativity and Product Innovation - 3 credits  
Business Elective - 6 credits 

International Business Management (15 credits)  
MKTS 304 International Marketing - 3 credits  
ECON 421 International Economics - 3 credits  
BMGT 441 Cross-cultural Business Management - 3 credits 
BMGT 453 Global Business Analysis - 3 credits  
Business Elective - 3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

9 credits  
120 credits  

Post-Baccalaureate Program Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Business 
Management  

9 credits  

45 credits  

Prerequisites to the Program  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  
MATH 180 College Algebra - 3 credits  
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
ACCT 210 Intro to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
ACCT 220 Management Accounting for Decision Makers - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits  
BMGT 208 Principles of Management - 3 credits  
BMGT 332 Introduction to Entrepreneurship - 3 credits 
BMGT 338 Quantitative Analysis for Decision Making - 3 credits 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone) - 3 credits 
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - 3 credits 
FIN 300 Financial Management - 3 credits  
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
HRM 207 Human Resource Management - 3 credits  
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
School of Business electives - 6 credits  

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

45 credits  

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Business Administration 
Degree Completion Program 

171 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: A student enrolled in this program may not have been a student at Point Park University  
within two years prior to enrolling in this program.  

42 credits  

31 credits  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone) 

Business Core Requirements  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
ACCT 210 Intro to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
ACCT 220 Management Accounting for Decision Makers - 3 credits OR 
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics - 3 credits 

BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 
BMGT 280 Business Career Prep - 1 credit 
BMGT 338 Quantitative Analysis for Decision Making - 3 credits OR  

CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
CMPS 101 Intro to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Prin. Of Microeconomics - 3 credits 
FIN 300 Financial Management - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
(At least 3 of these must be at RSB.) 
BMGT 202 Business Law II - 3 credits 
BMGT 208 Principles of Management - 3 credits  
BMGT 221 Business Communication and Research - 3 credits  
BMGT 234 The Ethical Leadership - 3 credits 
BMGT 271 The Money Thing: Life & Finances - 3 credits 
LEAD 110 Introduction to Leadership - 3 credits 
Business Management Internship, Experiential Credit, or Advisor Approval - 3 credits 

21 credits  

Open Credits  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

27 credits  
121 credits  

Certificate in Business Management 

Program Objectives 

1.  Apply major concepts within traditional areas of business management. 
2.  Analyze complex information to facilitate management decision-making. 
3.  Articulate thoughts and ideas both verbally and in writing. 
4.  Demonstrate an appreciation of individual differences and a sensitivity to diversity. 

Department Requirements 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits  

172 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BMGT 208 Principles of Management - 3 credits  
HRM 207 Human Resource Management - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Aviation Management 

Bachelor of Science in Aviation Management 

Program Objectives 

1.  Demonstrate critical thinking, problem solving, and decision-making skills relevant to the aviation 

industry’s complex and dynamic nature.  

2.  Employ professional communication skills with a diverse group of stakeholders, including 

employees, customers, regulatory authorities, and the general public. 

3.  Develop a comprehensive knowledge of business processes, laws, and best practices for the 

application of business acumen.  

4.  Apply inclusive and best industry practices within a national and global environment.   
5.  Develop understanding of the latest technologies and their applications in aviation management, 

6. 

such as aviation software systems, data analytics, and digitization of avionics. 
Identify key leadership and management skills that enhance employee engagement and 
organizational stability.  

Associate degree of 62-65 transfer credits from an FAA approved program. 

39 credits  

21 credits  

Management Requirements  
BMGT 101 Introduction to Business - 3 credits 
BMGT 208 Principles of Management - 3 credits 
BMGT 234 Ethical Leadership - 3 credits  
BMGT 270 The Money Thing - 3 credits 
BMGT 332 Introduction to Entrepreneurship - 3 credits 
CMPS 101 Intro to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits 
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
HRM 316 Labor Management and Relations - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
Choose three School of Business Electives - 9 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
AVT 301 Aviation Leadership - 3 credits 
AVT 302 Aviation Security and Policy - 3 credits 
AVT 303 Airport Operations and Management - 3 credits 
AVT 304 Aviation Law - 3 credits 
AVT 306 Corporate and Business Aviation - 3 credits 
AVT 401 Aviation Research Capstone - 3 credits 

173 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AVT 350 Aviation Internship - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

121 credits 

Bachelor of Science in Entrepreneurship & Innovation 

Program Objectives 

1.  Apply a design and innovation toolset to analyze and create new products and services.  
2.  Develop essential technology competencies that can be effectively employed in startups, social 

ventures, family businesses, and corporate enterprises. 

3.  Demonstrate strategic and financial planning capabilities through the development of a business 

plan and supporting financial documents.  

4.  Develop ability to communicate analysis of data derived from sales and marketing analytics to 

appropriate audiences.   

5.  Analyze and apply concepts and issues of entrepreneurial leadership, law, and ethics. 
6.  Enhance professional acumen through mentoring, structured internships, new venture launch, and 

related co-curricular activities.   

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone) 

Business Core Requirements  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
ACCT 210 Intro to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
ACCT 220 Management Accounting for Decision Makers - 3 credits OR 
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics - 3 credits 

BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 
BMGT 280 Business Career Prep - 1 credit 
BMGT 338 Quantitative Analysis for Decision Making - 3 credits OR  

CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
CMPS 101 Intro to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Prin. Of Microeconomics - 3 credits 
FIN 300 Financial Management - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
BMGT 101 Introduction to Business - 3 credits 
BMGT 332 Introduction to Entrepreneurship - 3 credits  
BMGT 336 Legal Aspects of Entrepreneurship - 3 credits  
BMGT 337 Entrepreneurial Finance - 3 credits  
BMGT 482 Entrepreneurial Residency - 6 credits 
MKTS 211 Digital Customer Experience - 3 credits 
Directed elective - 3 credits 

174 

42 credits  

31 credits  

39 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(A minimum of 3 credits earned through the completion of Internship, Cooperative Education, Study Abroad, or other 
immersive experience approved by the department is required. BMGT 482 Entrepreneurial Residency meets this 
requirement.) 

Choose a Concentration in Innovative Entrepreneurship or Social Entrepreneurship:  
Innovative Entrepreneurship (15 credits)  
BMGT 335 Scaling Operations - 3 credits  
CENG 311 Human Centered Design - 3 credits  
FIN 431 International Finance - 3 credits  
MKTS 320 Creativity and Product Innovation - 3 credits  
One School of Business elective - 3 credits 

Social Entrepreneurship (15 credits)  
CENG 250 Advocacy & Social Change - 3 credits 
CENG 310 Social Entrepreneurship - 3 credits  
CENG 311 Human Centered Design - 3 credits 
CENG 312 Digital Storytelling & Reporting - 3 credits 
One School of Business elective - 3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

9 credits  
121 credits  

Human Resource Management  

The Human Resource Management programs are designed to prepare students for a wide range of human 
resource related professions. Human Resource Management involves examining present and future employee 
needs,  including  workforce  planning,  reward  systems,  employment  laws,  EEOC  compliance,  employee 
relations, training and development, and strategic HR management.  

The  Human  Resource  Management  programs  recognize  the  interdisciplinary  nature  of  this  field,  by 
allowing for a student to engage in the pursuit of a minor, multiple internships, or a Co-op. There are three 
Human Resource Management programs available to suit a variety of students. The Bachelor of Science degree 
program is in the traditional four-year format.   

The post baccalaureate program is a 39-credit program designed for graduates who have earned a B.A. or 
B.S.  degree  in  an  area  other  than  Human  Resource  Management.    Students  must  successfully  complete  a 
minimum of 30 credits in residence in order to receive a baccalaureate degree from Point Park University.  

The minor program is an 18-credit area of study designed for Point Park University students who wish to 

supplement their studies with courses in Human Resource Management.   

The Human Resource Management Bachelor of Science and post baccalaureate Programs are aligned with 

the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) Competency Model. 

Program Outcomes 
Program objectives are specifically related to the application of KSAs (Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities) in the 
field of Human Resource Management and consistent with aspects of the SHRM Competency Model. 
1.  Analysis and Technology Utilization: Critically evaluate internal and external information to 

enhance decision-making. 

2.  Communication: Employ professional communication skills. 
3.  Critical Thinking: Develop creative problem-solving solutions based on best practices. 

175 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.  Management & Leadership: Develop a best practice mindset for directing and contributing to 

initiatives and processes within the organization. 

5.  Business Knowledge: Develop a comprehensive knowledge of business processes, laws, and best 

practices for the application of HR concepts. 

6.  Business Environment: Apply inclusive and ethical HR best practices within a national and global 

environment. 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Human Resource Management  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
HRM 420 SHRM CP Professional Certification Prep (Capstone) - Senior Capstone 

42 credits  

Recommended University Core Curriculum  
Understand People: PSYC 150 Psychological Foundations 
Discover Technology: CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science 

21 credits  

39 credits  

C = Taken in University Core 

Business Core Requirements  
MATH 180 College Algebra - C 
ACCT 210 Intro to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 
CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Prin. Of Microeconomics - 3 credits 
FIN 200 Introduction to Financial Management - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
HRM 420 SHRM CP Professional Certification Prep (Capstone) - C 

Major Requirements: 
ACCT 220 Managerial Accounting - 3 credits 
BMGT 101 Introduction to Business - 3 credits 
*CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits 
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
*PSYC 150 Psychological Foundations - 3 credits 
HRM 215 Human Capital - 3 credits 
HRM 220 Employee Life Cycle - 3 credits 
HRM 316 Labor and Management Relations - 3 credits 
HRM 319 Current Topics in HR - 3 credits 
HRM 320 HR Data Analysis - 3 credits 
HRM 330 Compensation and Benefits - 3 credits 
HRM 342 Research Methods in a Business Environment - 3 credits 
HRM 416 Human Resources Management II - 3 credits 

176 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                   
 
 
 
*Courses that can be taken in the University Core allowing for a Major Course Substitution of your 
choosing 
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits 
PSYC 150 Psychological Foundations - 3 credits 

Suggested Courses for University Core: 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits 

Directed Electives 
LEAD or PADM: Select one course 

3 credits 

Experiential Learning 
Complete a minimum of 3 credits through an internship, co-op, study abroad, HRM 318, or other approved experience 
(Concentration or General Electives). 

3 credits 

General Electives                                                                                                                      12 credits 
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

120 credits  

Post-Baccalaureate Program Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Human 
Resource Management  

6 credits  

33 credits  

Prerequisites of the Program  
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  

Department Major Requirements  
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
HRM 220 Employee Life Cycle - 3 credits 
HRM 316 Labor & Management Relations - 3 credits 
HRM 319 Current Topics in HRM - 3credits 
HRM 320 HR Data Analysis - 3 credits 
HRM 330 Compensation & Benefits - 3 credits 
HRM 342 Research Methods in a Business Environment - 3 credits 
HRM 416 Human Resources Management - 3 credits 
HRM 420 SHRM CP Professional Certification Prep (Capstone) - 3 credits  
PADM 311 Special Employee Relations in Public Agencies - 3 credits 
PSYC 215 Human Capital - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

39 credits  

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Marketing and Sales 

Program Objectives: 

1.  Critical Thinking/Problem Solving: Analyze and evaluate information to develop solutions that 

enhance marketing/sales decision making. 

2.  Communication: Demonstrate professional communication skills to effectively convey information 

to target audiences. 

177 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Business Knowledge/Theory and Practice: Apply business concepts within core areas of 

marketing/sales.  

4.  Analysis & Technology Utilization: Apply marketing/sales technology tools, research, and analytical 

techniques for decision making. 

5.  Business Environment: Apply ethical and socially responsible standards in marketing/sales decision 

making. 

6.  Teamwork: Collaborate with diverse individuals to achieve planned goals.  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone) 

42 credits  

Recommended University Core Curriculum  
Succeed in Business: MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits 
Apply & Appreciate the Arts: THEA 111 Introduction to Acting I - 3 credits 

Business Core Requirements  
ACCT 210 Introduction to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 
BMGT 338 Quantitative Analysis for Business Decision Making - 3 credits OR  

21 credits  

CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 

ECON 202 Principles of Econ/Microecon - 3 credits 
FIN 200 Introduction to Financial Management - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 

Major Requirements:                    
BMGT 101 Introduction to Business - 3 credits 
BMGT 275 Applied Leadership & Management Strategies - 3 credits 
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits* 
MKTS 210 Digital Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 305 Buyer Behavior - 3 credits 
MKTS 342 Research Methods in a Business Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 410 Technology Innovation in Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 420 Strategic Marketing and Sales Management - 3 credits 
THEA 111 Introduction to Acting I - 3 credits* 

30 credits  

*Courses that can be taken in the University Core allowing for a Major Course Substitution of your 
choosing 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling (Succeed in Business) - 3 credits 
THEA 111 Introduction to Acting I (Apply & Appreciate the Arts) - 3 credits 

15 credits 
Concentration:                                                                                                                  
Select Marketing, Professional Sales, Digital Marketing, or select three courses from “required” and two “directed 
electives.” 

178 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
**Complete a minimum of 3 credits through an internship, co-op, study abroad, MKTS 330, MKTS 350, or other 
approved experience. 
Marketing: 
Required: 
MKTS 211 Digital Customer Experience - 3 credits 
MKTS 303 Integrated Marketing Promotion - 3 credits 
MKTS 320 Creativity and Product Innovation - 3 credits 

Select two Directed Electives: (BMGT 380 counts as two) 
BMGT 380 Cooperative Education I - 6 credits** 
CENG 311 Human Centered Design - 3 credits 
MKTS 304 International Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 310 Personal Branding and Business Development - 3 credits 
MKTS 330 Playhouse Practicum - 3 credits** 
MKTS 335 Sponsorship in Marketing & Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 345 Influencer Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 350 Marketing and Sales Experiential Learning - 3 credits** 
MKTS 355 Internship I - 3 credits** 
MKTS 356 Internship II - 3 credits**  
MKTS 395 Special Topics in Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 415 Advanced Digital Marketing - 3 credits 

Digital Marketing: 
Required: 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
MKTS 211 Digital Customer Experience - 3 credits 
MKTS 415 Advanced Digital Marketing - 3 credits 

Select two Directed Electives: (BMGT 380 counts as two) 
BMGT 380 Cooperative Education I - 6 credits 
CENG 311 Human Centered Design - 3 credits 
CMPS 160 Databases - 3 credits 
MKTS 303 Integrated Marketing Promotion - 3 credits 
MKTS 320 Creativity and Product Innovation - 3 credits 
MKTS 330 Playhouse Practicum - 3 credits** 
MKTS 345 Influencer Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 350 Marketing and Sales Experiential Learning - 3 credits** 
MKTS 355 Internship I - 3 credits 
MKTS 356 Internship II - 3 credits 
MKTS 395 Special Topics in Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
MULT 365 Web Publishing I - 3 credits 
MULT 420 Web Publishing II - 3 credits 
PRAD 306 Social Media Practices - 3 credits 
PRAD 463 Social Media Analytics/SEO - 3 credits 

Professional Sales: 
Required: 

179 

 
 
 
 
 
BMGT 312 Business Negotiating - 3 credits 
MKTS 306 Advanced Selling - 3 credits OR 
SPOR 366 Sports Sales - 3 credits 

MKTS 310 Personal Branding and Business Development - 3 credits 

Select two Directed Electives: (BMGT 380 counts as two) 
BMGT 380 Cooperative Education I - 6 credits** 
MKTS 211 Digital Customer Experience - 3 credits 
MKTS 320 Creativity and Product Innovation - 3 credits 
MKTS 330 Playhouse Practicum - 3 credits** 
MKTS 335 Sponsorship in Marketing & Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 345 Influencer Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 350 Marketing and Sales Experiential Learning - 3 credits** 
MKTS 355 Internship I - 3 credits** 
MKTS 356 Internship II - 3 credits** 
MKTS 395 Special Topics in Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 415 Advanced Digital Marketing - 3 credits 
SPOR 366 Sports Sales - 3 credits 

General Electives                                                                                                                 
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

12 credits 
120 credits  

Post-Baccalaureate Program Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Marketing and 
Sales 

Prerequisites of the Program  
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  

6 credits  

33 credits  

Department Major Requirements  
BMGT 221 Business Communications and Research - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits 
MKTS 210 Digital Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 305 Buyer Behavior - 3 credits 
MKTS 310 Personal Branding & Bus. Development - 3 credits 
MKTS 320 Creativity and Product Innovation - 3 credits  
MKTS 341 Research Methods in a Business Environment - 3 credits 
MKTS 410 Technology Innovation in Marketing and Sales- 3 credits 
MKTS 420 Strategic Marketing & Sales Management - 3 credits 
Experiential component - 3 credits* 
*(Includes 3 credits earned through completion of an internship, cooperative education, study abroad, MKTS 350, or 
other 

180 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience approved by the program director.) 

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

39 credits  

Marketing Certificate 

Program Objectives 

1.  Find, evaluate, and use information effectively, ethically, and legally from a variety of formats, both 

traditional and technological, commonly used in the industry. 

2.  Effectively communicate thoughts and ideas through verbal, written, and electronic means to convey 

clear 
and organized information to target audiences. 

3.  Examine situations to uncover problems and opportunities, analyze information, evaluate 

alternatives, develop solutions, and facilitate decision-making. 

Department Requirements 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 305 Buyer Behavior - 3 credits 
MKTS 210 Digital Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 420 Marketing and Sales Management - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Digital Marketing Certificate 

Program Objectives 

1.  Find, evaluate, and use information effectively, ethically, and legally from a variety of formats, both 

traditional and technological, commonly used in the industry. 

2.  Effectively communicate thoughts and ideas through verbal, written, and electronic means to convey 

clear 
and organized information to target audiences. 

3.  Examine situations to uncover problems and opportunities, analyze information, evaluate 

alternatives, develop solutions, and facilitate decision-making. 

Department Requirements 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 210 Digital Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 211 Digital Customer Experience - 3 credits 
MKTS 415 Advanced Digital Marketing - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Professional Sales Certificate 

Program Objectives 

181 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  Find, evaluate, and use information effectively, ethically, and legally from a variety of formats, both 

traditional and technological, commonly used in the industry. 

2.  Effectively communicate thoughts and ideas through verbal, written, and electronic means to convey 

clear and organized information to target audiences. 

3.  Examine situations to uncover problems and opportunities, analyze information, evaluate alternatives, 

develop solutions, and facilitate decision-making. 

4.  Develop  and  refine  collaboration,  empathy,  and  influence  skills  to  responsibly  motivate  and  align 

others around opportunities within and outside of organizations. 

Department Requirements 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits 
MKTS 306 Advanced Selling - 3 credits 
MKTS 410 Tech/Innov Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

The Department of Sports, Arts, Entertainment, and Music 
Business Management (SAEM) 
Professor: Ed Traversari, M.B.A.; Paige Beal, M.B.A. 
Associate Professors: Robert Derda, M.S., (Chair) 
Assistant Professors: Melinda Colaizzi, B.M. 

Sports, Arts, Entertainment, and Music Business 

The SAEM program at Point Park University was a pioneer in the establishment of a degree program in 
sports, arts, and entertainment. Point Park’s location in downtown Pittsburgh allows for excellent access to the 
city’s  cultural  and  professional  sports  organizations,  most  of  which  are  within  easy  walking  distance  of  the 
campus. The curriculum builds upon a solid business management and general education core with specialized 
courses  in  event  management,  marketing  and  promotion,  facility  design  and  management,  sales  and 
sponsorship,  public  relations,  finance,  and  risk  management.  Each  student  must  complete  at  least  one 
internship in their field.  

Program Objectives 

1.  Analyze problems to facilitate management decision-making (IACBE - Critical Thinking/Problem 

Solving). 

2.  Develop collaborative skills through an immersive educational experience fostering effective 

teamwork (IACBE -Teamwork). 

3.  Employ communication skills to convey clear and organized information to target area (IACBE - 

Communication). 

4.  Apply information technology to the sports, arts, entertainment, and music industry (IACBE - 

Analysis & Technology Utilization). 

5.  Explain major concepts within the sports, arts, entertainment and music industry - (IACBE - 

Business Knowledge). 

6.  Assess best practices of corporate social responsibility, diversity, and decision-making (IACBE - 

Business Environment). 

182 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Sports, Arts, Entertainment & Music 
Business 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
SAEM 480 Capstone: Business Models of SAEM  
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics  

Recommended Courses in the Thematic Core 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - Succeed in Business 
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - Discover Technology 

Business Core Requirements  
SAEM 101 Introduction to SAE Business - 3 credits 
FIN 200 Introduction to Financial Management - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 
ACCT 210 Intro to Financial Accounting - 3 credits  
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
SAEM 320 Ticketing - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
SAEM 152 Business of Live Entertainment - 3 credits   
SAEM 201 Event Management - 3 credits  
SAEM 301 Facility and Venue Design and Administration - 3 credits  
SAEM 310 Personal Branding and Business Development - 3 credits  
SAEM 350 SAEM Internship - 3 credits  
SAEM 401 Legal Aspects of Sports, Arts & Entertainment - 3 credits  

42 credits  

21 credits  

33 credits  

SAEM Focus Area - 15 credits 
Students can choose 15 credits across all or one of the focus areas. Unduplicated credits in related minors or double majors 
may be used with advisor approval. 

SPORTS 
Choose 15 credits 
SPOR 266 Sports Administration and Coaching - 3 credits 
SPOR 360 Sports Agents - 3 credits 
SPOR 366 Sports Sales - 3 credits 
SPOR 367 Sports Marketing - 3 credits 
SPOR 390 Emerging Trends in Sports - 3 credits 
SAEM 300 Event Management II - 3 credits 
SAEM 395 Special Topics - 3 credits 

MUSIC 
Choose 15 credits 
SAEM 300 Event Management II - 3 credits 

183 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAEM 330 Talent Booking Management - 3 credits 
SAEM 331 Production Tour Management - 3 credits 
SAEM 332 Emerging Trends in the Music Industry - 3 credits 
SAEM 333 Pioneer Records - 3 credits 
SAEM 335 Music Video Workshop - 3 credits 
SAEM 336 Music Marketing - 3 credits 
SAEM 395 Special Topics - 3 credits 

ARTS 
Choose 15 credits 
SAEM 240 Performing Arts Presenting & Touring - 3 credits 
SAEM 325 Fundraising: Crowdfunding to Proposal Writing - 3 credits 
SAEM 395 Special Topics - 3 credits 
SAEM 420 Producing for Commercial & Nonprofit Performing Arts - 3 credits 
PROD 132 Stage Management I - 3 credits* 
PROD 145 Script Analysis - 2 credits* 
PROD 200/201 Tech Practicum III, IV - 2 credits each* 
PROD 440 Production Management - 3 credits* 
THEA 109 Elements of Stage Craft I - 2 credits* 
THEA 140/141 Production I, II - 2 credits each* 
*(Choose up to 6 credits if these courses.) 

ENTERTAINMENT 
Choose 15 credits from any SAEM focus area 

ALL FOCUS AREAS: 
Experiential Learning (max. of 9 credits) 
BMGT 380 Cooperative Education I - 6 credits 
SAEM 460 SAEM Internship II - 3 credits 
SAEM 461 SAEM Internship III - 3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

24 credits  
120 credits  

Sports Management 

Discover  the  exciting  opportunities  in  the  sports  industry  through  Point  Park  University's  new  Sports 
Management program, a dynamic specialization within the renowned Sports, Arts, Entertainment, and Music 
Business (SAEM) program. Our program equips students with the knowledge, skills, and real-world experience 
to succeed in one of the fastest-growing industries today. Located in the heart of downtown Pittsburgh, students 
benefit  from  direct  access  to  premier  sports  organizations  like  the  Pittsburgh  Steelers,  Cleveland  Cavaliers, 
Pittsburgh Pirates, Pittsburgh Penguins, and Pittsburgh Riverhounds/Riveters. 

Key highlights of the program include: 
•  Expert Faculty: Learn from industry professionals with extensive experience in the sports field. 
•  Comprehensive Curriculum: Specialized courses in sports administration, coaching, analytics, sales, 

and marketing, alongside SAEM courses in event management, venues, and ticketing. 

184 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Real-World Business Insight: Gain an understanding of sports monetization through relevant business 

coursework. 

•  Hands-On  Experience:  Complete  at  least  one  and  up  to  three  internships,  providing  invaluable 

industry connections and practical skills. 

Prepare to make an impact in the sports industry with a program designed to turn your passion into a 

successful career.  

Program Objectives 

1.  Analyze problems to facilitate management decision-making (IACBE - Critical Thinking/Problem 

Solving). 

2.  Develop collaborative skills through an immersive educational experience fostering effective 

teamwork (IACBE - Teamwork). 

3.  Employ communication skills to convey clear and organized information to target area (IACBE - 

Communication).  

4.  Apply information technology to the sports industry (IACBE - Analysis & Technology Utilization). 
5.  Explain major concepts within the sports industry (IACBE - Business Knowledge). 
6.  Assess best practices of corporate social responsibility, diversity and decision-making (IACBE - 

Business Environment). 

42 credits  

21 credits  

33 credits  

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Sports Management 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core  
SAEM 480 Business Models of SAE - Senior Capstone 
Recommended Courses in the Thematic Core 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - Succeed in Business 
CMPS 101 Introduction to Applied Computer Science - Discover Technology 

Business Core Requirements 
SAEM 101 Introduction to the SAE Business - 3 credits 
FIN 200 Introduction to Financial Management - 3 credits 
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits 
ACCT 210 Introduction to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
SAEM 320 Ticketing - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements 
SAEM 152 Business of Live Entertainment - 3 credits 
SAEM 201 Event Management - 3 credits 
SAEM 301 Facility/Venue Design & Administration - 3 credits 
SAEM 310 Personal Branding & Business Development - 3 credits 
SAEM 350 SAEM Internship - 3 credits 
SAEM 401 Legal Aspects of Sports, Arts, & Entertainment - 3 credits 
SPOR 266 Sports Administration & Coaching - 3 credits 
SPOR 360 Sports Agents - 3 credits 
SPOR 366 Sports Sales - 3 credits 

185 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPOR 367 Sports Marketing - 3 credits 
SPOR 390 Emerging Trends in Sports - 3 credits 

General Electives*  
*Students may choose a max. of 9 credits from BMGT 380, SAEM 460, and SAEM 461. 
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

24 credits  

120 credits 

Rowland School of Business Minors 

The minors in the Rowland School of Business listed below are available to all students at Point Park 

University. Minors consist of prerequisites plus 18 or 21 credits of coursework. 

Accounting Minor (21 credits)  
Prerequisites:  
ACCT 210 Introduction to Financial Accounting - 3 credits 
Minor:  
ACCT 220 Management Accounting for Decision Makers - 3 credits  
ACCT 230 Accounting Information Systems - 3 credits  
ACCT 310 Intermediate Financial Accounting I - 3 credits  
ACCT 311 Intermediate Financial Accounting II - 3 credits  
ACCT 312 Intermediate Financial Accounting III - 3 credits  
ACCT 410 Advanced Accounting Theory - 3 credits  
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits  

Applied Computer Science (18 credits) 
Select three of the following courses - 9 credits 
CMPS 160 Databases - 3 credits 
CMPS 161 Networking and Security - 3 credits 
CMPS 162 Introduction to Programming - 3 credits 
CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
Select three additional CMPS courses from the IT program - 9 credits 

Business Management Minor (18 credits)  
Prerequisites:  
CMPS 114 Problem Solving with Information Technology - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
Minor:  
ACCT 210 Introduction to Financial Accounting - 3 credits  
ACCT 220 Managerial Accounting - 3 credits  
BMGT 201 Business Law I - 3 credits  
HRM 207 Human Resource Management OR  

BMGT 208 Principles of Management - 3 credits  

FIN 300 Financial Management - 3 credits 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 

Digital Marketing Minor (18 credits) 

186 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prerequisites:  
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits  
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
Minor:  
MKTS 210 Digital Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 211 Digital Customer Experience - 3 credits 
MKTS 415 Advanced Digital Marketing - 3 credits 
MULT 365 Web Publishing I - 3 credits 
PRAD 306 Social Media Practices - 3 credits 
PRAD 463 Social Media Analytics and SEO - 3 credits 

Economics Minor (18 credits) 
Prerequisites:  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
MATH 180 College Algebra - 3 credits 
Cumulative GPA of 2.0 or higher 
Minor:  
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics - 3 credits 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - 3 credits 
CMPS 163 Business Analytics - 3 credits 
ECON 310 Intermediate Price Theory- 3 credits 
ECON 421 International Economics - 3 credits 
ECON 395 Special Topics in Economics OR 

ECON 496 Independent Study in Economics - 3 credits  

Emergency Medical Services Minor (18 credits) 
PADM 340 Foundations of EMS - 3 credits 
PADM 341 EMS Management - 3 credits 
PADM 342 EMS Community Risk Reduction - 3 credits 
PADM 345 EMS Safety and Risk Management - 3 credits 
PADM 346 Legal, Political and Regulatory Issues in EMS - 3 credits 
PADM 440 EMS Quality and Performance Management - 3 credits 

Entrepreneurship Minor (18 credits)  
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits  
BMGT 208 Principles of Management - 3 credits  
BMGT 332 Introduction to Entrepreneurship - 3 credits  
BMGT 336 Entrepreneurial Regulation - 3 credits  
BMGT 454 Advanced Entrepreneurial Applications - 3 credits  
CMPS 300 Information Technology for Managers - 3 credits  

Finance Minor (18 credits)  
Prerequisites:  
ACCT 210 Introduction to Financial Accounting - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits 
Cumulative GPA of 2.0 or higher 

187 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Minor:  
FIN 300 Financial Management - 3 credits 
FIN 306 Economics of Money & Banking - 3 credits 
FIN 426 Investment Management - 3 credits 
FIN 431 International Finance - 3 credits 
FIN 461 Risk Management - 3 credits 
FIN 395 Special Topics in Finance OR  

FIN 496 Independent Study in Finance - 3 credits 

Fire Service Administration Minor (18 credits) 
PADM 330 Fire and Emergency Services Administration - 3 credits 
PADM 331 Political and Legal Foundations of Fire Protection - 3 credits 
PADM 332 Fire Prevention Organization and Management - 3 credits 
PADM 335 Personnel Management for Fire and Emergency Services OR 

PADM 311 Special Employee Relations - 3 credits 

PADM 336 Community Risk Reduction for Fire and Emergency Services - 3 credits 
PADM 430 Applications of Fire Research - 3 credits 

Hospitality Management Minor (18 credits) 
BMGT 231 Introduction to the Hospitality Industry Profession - 3 credits 
BMGT 241 Sales/Revenue and Marketing Planning in the Hospitality Industry - 3 credits 
BMGT 331 Safety and Security in the Hospitality and Entertainment Venues - 3 credits 
BMGT 341 Operations Management in the Hospitality Industry - 3 credits 
BMGT 481 Integrative Experience (Capstone) - 3 credits 
One School of Business elective or other elective 
Suggested courses include: internship, C0-OP, Foreign Language, or other related course 

Human Resources Management Minor (18 credits)  
HRM 205 People and the Environment - 3 credits  
HRM 220 The Employee Life Cycle - 3 credits  
HRM 316 Labor and Management Relations - 3 credits 
HRM 320 HR Data Analysis - 3 credits  
HRM 330 Compensation and Benefits - 3 credits  
HRM 416 Human Resource Management II - 3 credits 

Marketing Minor (18 credits)  
Prerequisite: 
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits  
Minor:  
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits  
MKTS 210 Digital Marketing - 3 credits 
MKTS 305 Buyer Behavior - 3 credits 
MKTS 320 Creativity and Product Innovation - 3 credits 
MKTS 410 Technology/Innovation in Mktg and Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 420 Marketing and Sales Management - 3 credits 

188 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Nonprofit Management Minor (18 credits)  
PADM 206 Nonprofit Organizations - 3 credits  
PADM 214 Public Budgeting and Finance I - 3 credits 
PADM 317 Legal Aspects of Nonprofit Organizations - 3 credits 
PADM 405 Leading Nonprofit Organizations - 3 credits 
SAEM 325 Fundraising from Crowdfunding to Proposal Writing - 3 credits 
Select one (1) of the following courses - 3 credits 
ACCT 460 Nonprofit Accounting- 3 credits 
PADM 311 Special Employee Relations in Public Organizations - 3 credits 
PADM 314 Public Budget and Finance II - 3 credits 
PADM 411 Internship - 3 credits 
SAEM 350 Internship I - 3 credits 

Professional Sales Minor (18 credits) 
Prerequisite:  
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits  
Minor: 
MKTS 206 Professional Selling - 3 credits  
MKTS 305 Buyer Behavior- 3 credits 
MKTS 306 Advanced Selling - 3 credits 
MKTS 310 Personal Branding & Business Development - 3 credits  
MKTS 406 Sales Management - 3 credits 
MKTS 410 Technology/Innovation in Mktg and Sales - 3 credits 

Public Administration Minor (18 credits)  
PADM 210 Public Administration - 3 credits  
Choose any 5 PADM electives - 15 credits  

Sports, Arts, Entertainment & Music Business Management Minor (18 credits) 
SAEM 101 Introduction to the SAE Business - 3 credits 
SAEM 152 Business of Live Entertainment - 3 credits   
SAEM 201 Event Management - 3 credits 
SAEM 310 Personal Branding and Business Development - 3 credits  
SAEM 401 Legal Aspects of SAE - 3 credits 
SAEM Elective - 3 credits  

Community Engagement and Social Change Minor (18 Credits) 
 Required Courses 
CENG 150 Introduction to Community Engagement - 3 credits  
CENG 250 Advocacy and Social Change - 3 credits 
CENG 450 Community Engagement Practicum - 3 credits 

Choose Three Additional Courses (9 Credits) from the following 
CENG 170 LGBTQ+ Studies - 3 credits 
CENG 300 Human Rights in Theory and Practice - 3 credits 
CENG 350 Social Inequalities and Health Equity - 3 credits  

189 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CENG 395 Special Topics in Community Engagement - 3 credits  
SOCW 202 Social Issues - 3 credits 
SOC 205 Social Inequality in America - 3 credits  
SOCW 326 Social Welfare Policy - 3 credits 
SOC 415 Women: Historical and Global Perspective - 3 credits 
 PSYC 204 Social Psychology - 3 credits 
PSYC 350 Community Psychology - 3 credits  
HIST 206 Foundations in Feminism - 3 credits  
POLS 207 Public Policy Issues - 3 credits 
ECON 419 Economics of Social Issues - 3 credits  
PADM 206 Non-Profit Organizations - 3 credits 
PADM 210 Public Administration - 3 credits 
PADM 303 Public Policy and Decision Analysis - 3 credits 

Women and Gender Studies Minor– 18 credits 
 Required Courses 
CENG 160 Introduction to Women and Gender Studies - 3 credits CENG 360 Feminist Theory- 3 credits 

Choose Four Additional Courses(12 credits) from the following: 
CENG 170 LGBTQ+ Studies - 3 credits 
HIST 206 Foundations in Feminism: Women’s History in the Western World - 3 credits 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - 3 credits  
PSYC 241/SOCW 241-LGBTQ Mental Health - 3 credits 
 PSYC 251 Psychology of Women - 3 credits 
PSYC 253 Psychology of Sexual Behavior - 3 credits 
 ENGL 255 LGBTQ Literature - 3 credits 
ENGL 300 Feminist Fairy Tales - 3 credits 

ENGL 305 Authors I ( Oscar Wilde or others with permission of the CENG department Chair) - 3 credits 

ENGL 306 Authors II ( The Brontes, Plath, and Sexon or others with permission of the CENG department Chair) - 3 credits 
CENG 300 Human Rights in Theory and Practice - 3 credits 
 CENG 350 Social Inequalities and Health Equity - 3 credits 
 SOCW 350 Sex, Gender, and Identity Politics - 3 credits 
SOC 415 Women: Historical and Global Perspective - 3 credit 

Graduate Studies  

The Rowland School of Business offers a Master of Business Administration (M.B.A.) degree with eight 
concentration  options—Business  Analytics;  Engineering  Management;  Global  Supply  Chain  Management; 
Health  Systems  Management;  International  Business;  Management;  Management  Information  Systems 
(M.I.S.);  and  Sports,  Arts,  and  Entertainment  Management,  as  well  as  a  Master  of  Science  in  Healthcare 
Administration and Management, a Master of Science in Information Systems and Business Analytics with 
M.B.A. and M.S. dual-degree options, and a Master of Arts in Organizational Leadership. A concurrent Master 
of Arts in Media Communication and M.B.A. is also offered. The Department of Community Engagement 
offers a Ph.D. in Community Engagement. For a graduate catalog or information, visit the website or please 
call the Graduate Admissions Office at (412) 392-3808. 

190 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Early Start Programs with the Rowland School of Business 

The School of Communication is partnering with the Rowland School of Business to offer “Early Start” 
into the RSOB’s Master’s programs. This will give students an opportunity to earn a bachelor’s degree in the 
following  areas: Broadcasting;  Graphic & Interactive  Design; Digital Journalism; Multimedia; Photography; 
Public Relations, Advertising, & Social Media; and Sports Communication while taking 6 credits towards a 
master’s program.  

The RSB is also offering any of its undergraduate degrees the opportunity to earn up to 6 credits towards 

a master’s degree program within the School of Business. 

191 

 
 
 
 
 
School of Communication 
Raymond Ankney, Ph.D., Dean 

B.A. - Broadcasting 
B.A. - Digital Journalism 
B.F.A - Graphic & Interactive Design 
B.A. - Multimedia 
B.F.A. - Photography 
B.A. - Public Relations, Advertising, and Social Media (also online) 
B.A. - Social Media Management (online only)  
B.A. - Sports Communication  

B.A. to M. A 4+ 1 Programs 
Bachelor’s to Master’s in Business Early Start Programs 

Certificates in: Broadcast Production, Broadcast Reporting, Digital Journalism, Graphic Design, 
Multimedia, Photography, Photojournalism, Public Relations/Advertising 

School of Communication  
Raymond Ankney, Ph.D., Dean 

Professors: Thomas Baggerman, Ph.D. (Chair); Robin Cecala, Ph.D.; Aimee-Marie Dorsten, Ph.D.; Tatyana 
Dumova, Ph.D.; Heather Starr Fiedler, Ph.D.; Christopher Rolinson, M.F.A. 
Associate Professors: April Friges, M.F.A.; Robert Meyers, M.F.A.; Jenna Lo Castro, Ph.D. 
Assistant Professors: Daud Isa, Ph.D.; Ben Schonberger, M.F.A.  
Senior Lecturer: Camille Downing, M.A. 
Professor Emeritus/Emerita: David Fabilli, M.A.; Helen Fallon, M.A.; Steven Hallock, Ph.D.; Timothy 
Hudson, Ph.D.; Robert O’Gara, M.A. 

The mission of the Point Park University School of Communication is to provide students with a versatile, 
sustainable,  professional  communication  education  through  sound  academic  coursework  and  significant 
creative and practical learning opportunities.   

The faculty of the School explore, address, and adapt to the changing nature and needs of 21st century 
media professions. Communication students study and work together in an atmosphere of interdisciplinary 
cooperation in the classroom, through student organizations and via student media.  

School of Communication students enjoy a rich and exciting blend of hands-on educational experiences 
in small class settings. Point Park’s unique urban location in the heart of Pittsburgh (a top 25 national media 
market) provides students with faculty who are proven professionals, well connected to top media and mass 
communication organizations. Major government (local, state and federal), news media (broadcasting, print 
and  Internet),  and  advertising/public  relations  firms  are  within  walking  distance  to  provide  frequent  guest 
speaker presentations and the best internship opportunities. 

Broadcasting 

Broadcasting  students  in  the  production  concentration  learn  the  tools  and  principles  of  visual 
communication  particular  to  the  fields  of  video  production,  audio  production,  television,  radio,  and  live 
production. Students in this area stake out successful careers as television and radio producers and directors, 
media production experts for creative agencies and corporations, and event production specialists.  

192 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Broadcasting students in the reporting concentration turn their efforts to mastering the skills needed for 
on-air reporting and behind-the-scenes producing. Students in this area stake out successful careers as television 
and radio producers; reporters and anchors for news, sports, and entertainment programs; and as the public 
face of businesses ranging from sports teams to large corporations. This program also offers two accelerated 
Graduate Degree Options – a 4+1 program with the Master’s Degree in Public Relations and Advertising and 
an  Early  Start  Option  for  the  Master’s  Degrees  in  Organizational  Leadership,  Business  Administration, 
Healthcare Administration and Management, and Business Analytics and Information Systems.  

Graphic and Interactive Design 

B.F.A. in Graphic and Interactive Design students learn to research, evaluate, create, design, and produce 
professional-level materials for a variety of print, digital, and interactive projects. This degree focuses beyond 
tools and software, emphasizing  aesthetic and design principles to  master a project from  beginning  to end. 
Students in this area typically go on to work for PR & Advertising Agencies, Internet creative companies, or 
corporations.  This  program  also  offers  accelerated  Graduate  Degree  Options  for  the  Master’s  Degrees  in 
Organizational  Leadership,  Business  Administration,  Healthcare  Administration  and  Management,  and 
Business Analytics and Information Systems. 

Journalism 

At Point Park, students interested in newsgathering and reporting in print and online media will find a 
long, strong and successful tradition of preparing professional journalists for the challenges of this noble and 
dynamic career. Students in this area often work at Print and Web news and entertainment publications after 
graduation.  This  program  also  offers  two  accelerated  Graduate  Degree  Options  –  a  4+1  program  with  the 
Master’s Degree in Public Relations and Advertising and an Early Start Option for the Master’s Degrees in 
Organizational  Leadership,  Business  Administration,  Healthcare  Administration  and  Management,  and 
Business Analytics and Information Systems. 

Multimedia 
  Our multimedia major includes classes in a rich variety of new technologies and traditional storytelling 
to teach you to be adept at web design, digital photography, and the use of audio, video, and graphics for web 
distribution. Students in this area often move on to successful careers as web developers, web content 
specialists, and multimedia experts for media organizations and other companies. This program also offers 
two accelerated Graduate Degree Options – a 4+1 program with the Master’s Degree in Public Relations and 
Advertising and an Early Start Option for the Master’s Degrees in Organizational Leadership, Business 
Administration, Healthcare Administration and Management, and Business Analytics and Information 
Systems. 

Photography 

The  B.F.A.  in  photography  program  is  dedicated  to  photographers  and  artists,  students,  and  scholars, 
creating and interpreting the world of the visual image. Photography students have the opportunity to pursue 
fine art, fashion, landscape, still life, portraiture, photojournalism, and other specialized topics. 

Photography students are grounded in the creative and technological skills of the medium and will gain 
an understanding of the professional world through classes, internships, and networking opportunities. This 
program also offers two accelerated Graduate Degree Options – a 4+1 program with the Master’s Degree in 
Public  Relations  and  Advertising  and  an  Early  Start  Option  for  the  Master’s  Degrees  in  Organizational 
Leadership,  Business  Administration,  Healthcare  Administration  and  Management,  and  Business  Analytics 
and Information Systems. 

Public Relations and Advertising 

In this area, students study traditional forms and methods of publicity, press relations, events planning, 
corporate  communication,  media  planning,  advertising,  and  marketing.  Students  gain  substantial  practical 
experience during their academic career by working with Wood Street Communications, Bison Media, and the 
student chapters of the Public Relations Society of America and the Advertising  Federation. This degree is 

193 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
offered both on-ground and completely online. This program also offers accelerated Graduate Degree Options 
for the Master’s Degrees in Organizational Leadership, Business Administration, Healthcare Administration 
and Management, and Business Analytics and Information Systems. 

Social Media Management  

Combining management techniques with innovative social media marketing concepts, this social media 

degree program delivers the professional knowledge needed for career success. Courses prepare students to 
apply effective management methods and innovative marketing skills in a variety of careers. In addition, the 
curriculum also features real-world projects along with social media training that can lead to specific 
credentials upon completion. This program is intended for those students with extensive transfer credits. 

Sports Communication 

The  broad-based  B.A.  in  sports  communication  major  covers  broadcasting,  social  media  and  fan 
engagement, journalism, public relations and advertising, and more — equipping you with the skills to be an 
essential part of the sports industry. Students in this major often go on to work with professional sports teams 
at all levels, including those at Colleges and Universities. This program also offers two accelerated Graduate 
Degree Options – a 4+1 program with the Master’s Degree in Public Relations and Advertising and an Early 
Start  Option  for  the  Master’s  Degrees  in  Organizational  Leadership,  Business  Administration,  Healthcare 
Administration and Management, and Business Analytics and Information Systems. 

Minimum Grade Requirements  

Students may not graduate with an “F” in any required Communication course.  

Minors 

Students  minor  in  the  School  of  Communication  in  two  different  ways.  There  are  minors  for  those 

currently enrolled in the School and those outside of the School as follows:  

 Internal Minors for Communication majors:  

A  current  Communication  major  will  be  able  to  minor  in  another  area  by  taking  four  School  of 
Communication courses beyond the major requirements for his/her specific School of Communication major 
program guide. With the guidance of an academic advisor, the student will select from all Communication 
courses not specifically required in his or her major.  

External Minors for Communication Majors 

 Minors  are  available  in  departments  throughout  the  University,  usually  requiring  18-21  credits  to 

complete. 

Bachelor’s Degree Requirements  
A typical Communication degree program consists of the following:  

•  University Core Requirements  
•  Department Major Requirements including Major Electives 
•  General Electives   

By the sophomore year, students should declare one of the structured majors in consultations with their 
advisors. A minor or second major is recommended to strengthen and broaden the student’s knowledge base 
and career  marketability. General Electives  credits may be  used to minor  in another discipline  or toward a 
double major.  

194 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internships and Cooperative Education: 

Internships  and  Co-Ops  must  be  completed  with  organizations  outside  the  University.  Additionally,  a 
maximum of 3 credits of internship (COMM 313/413) or 6 credits of Co-Op (COMM 380) may be earned for 
a single experience, regardless of the number of hours completed. A student may intern at the same employer 
with a new job title for additional internship credit (COMM 413) if the job duties are unique from a previous 
experience.  

A maximum number of 6 experiential learning credits (Internship or Co-op) may be counted in Major 
Electives. An additional 3 credits of experiential learning may be counted in General Electives, for a maximum 
of 9 experiential credits toward graduation. 

Credit can only be earned in the semester that the internship is taking place, and no credit will be granted 

for past work.  

Majors: Detailed Requirements  

Bachelor of Arts Degree in Broadcasting  
Program Objectives 

1.  Demonstrate adherence to the professional standards of broadcast writing. 
2.  Employ principles of aesthetics and composition. 
3.  Apply ethical and legal principles to media production and distribution. 
4.  Use industry-standard hardware and software to produce video and audio projects. 
5.  Evaluate and interpret the historical, business, and news environment in which broadcasters 

operate. 

6.  Produce professional-level video and/or audio projects suitable for broadcast distribution. 

42 credits  

29 credits 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
COMM 490 Media Entrepreneurship - Senior Capstone 

School of Communication BA Core 
COMM 105 Media & Society - 3 credits 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits 
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 300 Career Preparation Seminar - 1 credit 
COMM 311 Practicum - 1 credit   
COMM 412 Media Ethics and Responsibilities - 3 credits   
COMM 418 Communication Law and Regulation - 3 credits     
COMM 420 Diversity and Communication - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 

Production Concentration Requirements  
BPMM 202 Introduction to Broadcasting - 3 credits 
BPMM 216 Multi-Camera Video Production and Directing - 3 credits 

 18 credits 

195 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 credits 

6 credits 

6 credits 

BPMM 223 Radio Production - 3 credits 
BPMM 323 Media Programming, Sales, and Distribution - 3 credits 
BPMM 329 Professional Video Techniques - 3 credits OR 

BPMM 423 Advanced Radio Production - 3 credits 

BPMM 341 Broadcast Copywriting - 3 credits 

Reporting Concentration Requirements 
BPMM 202 Introduction to Broadcasting - 3 credits 
JOUR 260 Newsgathering & Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 304 Broadcast Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 317 On-Camera Performance - 3 credits 
JOUR 324 Broadcast Announcing - 3 credits 
JOUR 445 Producing and Anchoring the News - 3 credits 

Production Concentration Electives 
Choose two courses from the following:   
BPMM 303 Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
BPMM 329 Professional Video Techniques - 3 credits 
BPMM 423 Advanced Radio Production - 3 credits 
BPMM 442 Advanced Television Production - 3 credits 
COMM 313 Mass Media Internship I - 3 credits 
COMM 413 Mass Media Internship II - 3 credits 
COMM 380 Co-operative Education - 6 credits 
COMM 390 International Media - 3 credits 
JOUR 446 History of Documentary Cinema - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
MULT 470 Documentary Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 365 Experimental Video - 3 credits 
BPMM 295,395,495 Special Topics - 3 credits 

Reporting Concentration Electives 
Choose two courses from the following: 
COMM 313 Mass Media Internship I - 3 credits  
COMM 413 Mass Media Internship II - 3 credits 
COMM 380 Cooperative Education - 6 credits 
COMM 390 International Media - 3 credits 
JOUR 302 Photojournalism I - 3 credits 
JOUR 308 Multiplatform Magazine Reporting I - 3 credits 
JOUR 312 Advanced Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 406 Public Affairs Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 409 Specialized Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 410 Data and Investigative Journalism - 3 credits 
JOUR 424 Advanced Broadcast Announcing - 3 credits 
JOUR 446 History of Documentary Cinema - 3 credits 
MULT 220 Wiring for Multimedia & the Web - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
BPMM 295, 395, 495 Special Topics - 3 credits 

196 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

27 credits  
122 credits  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Digital Journalism  
Program Objectives  
1. Demonstrate professional-level journalism reporting, writing, photojournalism editing skills, and news 
judgment.  
2. Demonstrate an understanding of principles of aesthetics and composition. 
3. Apply ethical and legal principles to media production and distribution. 
4. Apply basic and advanced interview techniques, appropriate for professional journalistic work.  
5. Demonstrate an ability to research and develop sources for reporting. 
6. Produce professional-level short and/or long-form reporting and/or documentary packages for multiple 
media platforms. 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
JOUR 490 Journalism Capstone  

School of Communication BA Core 
COMM 105 Media & Society - 3 credits 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits 
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 300 Career Preparation Seminar - 1 credit 
COMM 311 Practicum - 1 credit   
COMM 412 Media Ethics and Responsibilities - 3 credits   
COMM 418 Communication Law and Regulation - 3 credits     
COMM 420 Diversity and Communication - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 

Journalism Requirements  
JOUR 260 Newsgathering & Reporting - 3 credits  
JOUR 302 Photojournalism I - 3 credits 
JOUR 340 Point Park News Service - 3 credits  
JOUR 410 Data and Investigative Journalism - 3 credits 
JOUR 414 Multiplatform Magazine Reporting I - 3 credits 
JOUR 406 Public Affairs Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 409 Specialized Reporting - 3 credits 

Photojournalism Concentration Requirements 
JOUR 260 Newsgathering & Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 302 Photojournalism I - 3 credits 
JOUR 304 Broadcast News Reporting - 3 credits 

197 

42 credits  

29 credits 

21 credits 

21 credits 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 credits 

JOUR 315 Photojournalism II - 3 credits 
JOUR 340 Point Park News Service - 3 credits 
JOUR 414 Multiplatform Magazine Reporting I - 3 credits 
MULT 470 Short Documentary - 3 credits 

Department Electives  
Choose three courses from the following:  
BPMM 202 Introduction to Broadcasting - 3 credits 
COMM 313 Internship I - 3 credits 
COMM 320 Information Graphics - 3 credits 
COMM 380 Cooperative Education - 6 credits 
COMM 390 International Media - 3 credits 
COMM 413 Internship II - 3 credits 
JOUR 257 Feature Writing - 3 credits 
JOUR 272 Culture & Entertainment Journalism - 3 credits 
JOUR 295,395,495 Special Topics - 3 credits 
JOUR 312 Advanced Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 324 Broadcast Announcing - 3 credits 
JOUR 406 Public Affairs Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 409 Specialized Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 415 Multiplatform Magazine Reporting II - 3 credits 
JOUR 446 History of Documentary Cinema - 3 credits 
JOUR 465 Mass Media History - 3 credits 
MULT 220 Writing for Multimedia & Web - 3 credits 
MULT 365 Web Publishing I - 3 credits 
MULT 470 Short Documentary - 3 credits 
PRAD 206 Introduction to PR/AD - 3 credits 
SPTS 320 Sports Podcasting - 3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

21 credits 
122 credits  

Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a major in Graphic & Interactive Design  
Program Objectives  

1.  Research, create, design, and produce materials for a variety of graphic and interactive design 

projects. 

2.  Demonstrate an understanding of design principles, aesthetics, and composition. 
3.  Apply ethical and legal principles to design, production, and implementation.  
4.  Demonstrate the ability to customize design projects for a variety of audiences and messages. 
5.  Demonstrate the ability to use industry-standard hardware, software, and tools to create professional 

quality projects for a variety of print and digital platforms.  

6.  Design and produce professional-level visual communication design projects. 
7.  Create a professional-level portfolio of graphic and interactive design work. 

Core Requirements  

42 credits  

198 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
ART 100 Introduction to the Visual Arts - Appreciate & Apply the Arts 
GRID 490 Graphic Design Capstone  

School of Communication BFA Core 
ART 305 OR 306 American or Modern Art - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
GRID 103 Graphic Design I - 3 credits 
PHOT 110 Foundations of Art & Design - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 350 Digital Image Editing - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
COMM 311 Practicum - 1 credit 
COMM 418 Communication Law and Regulation - 3 credits 
GRID 160 Graphic Design Thinking - 3 credits 
GRID 205 Graphic Design Illustration - 3 credits 
GRID 250 History of Graphic Design - 3 credits 
GRID 305 Typography I - 3 credits 
GRID 307 Graphic Design II - 3 credits 
GRID 336 Branding & Corporate Identity - 3 credits 
GRID 340 Interactive Design I - 3 credits 
GRID 405 Packaging & Retail Design - 3 credits 
GRD  414 Professional Practices - 3 credits 
GRID 415 Typography II - 3 credits 
GRID 440 Interactive Design II - 3 credits 
PHOT 316 Studio Lighting - 3 credits 
PRAD 206 Intro to PR/AD - 3 credits 
PRAD 301 PR/AD Design & Management - 3 credits 

Major Electives 
Choose 2: 
ART 305 Modern Art - 3 credits OR 
         ART 306 American Art - 3 credits 
BPMM 303 Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
BPMM 329 Professional Video Techniques - 3 credits 
COMM 313 Internship I - 3 credits 
COMM 412 Media Ethics & Responsibilities - 3 credits 
COMM 413 Internship II - 3 credits 
GRID 296, 395, 495 Special Topics - 3 credits 
PHOT 368 Exploring Art Through Prose - 3 credits 
PHOT 385 Commercial and Editorial - 3 credits 
PRAD 306 Social Media Practices - 3 credits 

18 credits 

46 credits  

6 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

12 credits  
124 credits  

199 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Multimedia  
Program Objectives  

1.  Research, write, and edit materials for a variety of media platforms. 
2.  Demonstrate an understanding of principles of media design, aesthetics, and composition. 
3.  Apply ethical and legal principles to media production and distribution.  
4.  Demonstrate the ability to customize media materials for a variety of audiences and messages. 
5.  Use industry-standard hardware and software to create multimedia projects for a variety of media 

platforms. 

6.  Produce professional-level media pieces including photographs, video, Web, and graphic design. 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
MULT 455 Multimedia Capstone - Senior Capstone (Production) OR  

42 credits  

MULT 470 Documentary Photography - Senior Capstone (Visual Communication) 

29 credits 

21 credits 

School of Communication BA Core 
COMM 105 Media & Society - 3 credits 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits 
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 300 Career Preparation Seminar - 1 credit 
COMM 311 Practicum - 1 credit   
COMM 412 Media Ethics and Responsibilities - 3 credits   
COMM 418 Communication Law and Regulation - 3 credits     
COMM 420 Diversity and Communication - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
Production Concentration: 
COMM 320 Information Graphics - 3 credits 
MULT 220 Writing for Multimedia and the Web - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
MULT 330 Multimedia Design - 3 credits 
MULT 365 Web Publishing I - 3 credits 
MULT 420 Web Publishing II - 3 credits 
PHOT 350 Digital Image Editing - 3 credits 

Visual Communication Concentration: 
MULT 220 Writing for Multimedia and the Web - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
MULT 330 Multimedia Design - 3 credits 
PHOT 316 Studio Lighting - 3 credits 
PHOT 350 Digital Image Editing - 3 credits 

200 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 credits 

PHOT 365 Experimental Video - 3 credits 
PHOT 385 Commercial and Editorial Photo - 3 credits 

Major Electives 
Choose two courses from the following: 
BPMM 202 Introduction to Broadcasting - 3 credits 
BPMM 223 Radio Production - 3 credits 
BPMM 303 Motion Graphics - 3 credits 
BPMM 329 Professional Video Techniques - 3 credits 
COMM 290 Seminar in Media Studies - 3 credits 
COMM 313 Internship I - 3 credits 
COMM 413 Internship II - 3 credits 
COMM 380 Cooperative Education - 6 credits 
COMM 390 International Media - 3 credits 
COMM 470 Technology Mediated Communications - 3 credits 
COMM 471 Global Communication - 3 credits 
COMM 472 Communication, Technology, and Culture - 3 credits 
CMPS 162 Introduction to Programming - 3 credits 
JOUR 260 Newsgathering and Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 304 Broadcast News Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 312 Advanced Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 315 Photojournalism II - 3 credits 
JOUR 410 Data and Investigative Journalism - 3 credits 
JOUR 414 Multiplatform Magazine Reporting I - 3 credits 
JOUR 415 Multiplatform Magazine Reporting II - 3 credits 
JOUR 465 Mass Media History - 3 credits 
MULT 295,395,495 Special Topics - 3 credits 
MULT 365 Web Publishing I - 3 credits 
MULT 420 Web Publishing II - 3 credits 
MULT 455 Multimedia Capstone - 3 credits 
MULT 470 Documentary Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 110 Foundations of Art & Design I - 3 credits 
PHOT 207 History of Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 316 Studio Lighting - 3 credits 
PHOT 365 Experimental Video - 3 credits 
PHOT 385 Commercial and Editorial Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 414 Professional Practices in Photography - 3 credits 
PRAD 206 Introduction to PR/AD - 3 credits 
SPTS 300 Sports Broadcasting - 3 credits 
SPTS 325 Sports Photography and Video - 3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

24 credits  
122 credits  

Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree with a major in Photography  

201 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Objectives  

1.  Research, write, and edit materials for a variety of audiences exploring topics in visual art and 

photography, and compose artist statements for exhibition. 

2.  Describe and demonstrate knowledge of the history, aesthetic standards, professional, and artistic 

characteristics of art and photography. 

3.  Construct moral philosophies around the medium by applying knowledge of best practices in the 
industry, utilizing ethical and legal principles, within professional and nonconventional standards. 

4.  Demonstrate an applied understanding of the visual language of photography and the ability to 

incorporate technical, formal, and conceptual competencies in their creative work with 
interpretation of other artistic media. 

5.  Professionally assess and critique (describe, interpret, evaluate, and theorize, articulated both 

verbally and in written form) one’s own photographs and those produced by others. 

6.  Demonstrate their ability to produce lens-based work that is consistent with high professional 

standards, suitable for publication and/or gallery exhibition. 

42 credits  

18 credits 

39 credits 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
PHOT 482 Senior Thesis II - Senior Capstone 

School of Communication BFA Core 
ART 305 Modern Art OR 

ART 306 American Art - 3 credits 

COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
GRID 103 Graphic Design I - 3 credits 
PHOT 110 Foundations of Art and Design - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 350 Digital Image Editing - 3 credits 

Major Requirements  
MULT 365 Web Publishing I - 3 credits 
PHOT 204 Film and Darkroom Photography I - 3 credits 
PHOT 207 History of Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 309 Film and Darkroom Photography II - 3 credits 
PHOT 316 Studio Lighting - 3 credits 
PHOT 365 Experimental Video - 3 credits 
PHOT 368 Exploring Art through Prose - 3 credits 
PHOT 370 Contemporary Issues in Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 385 Commercial & Editorial Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 390 Advanced Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 400 Photographic Art Marketing - 3 credits 
PHOT 414 Professional Practices in Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 481 Senior Thesis - 3 credits 

Major Electives:                                                                                           
Choose 4 courses from the following: 
ART 213 Drawing - 3 credits 

12 credits 

202 

 
 
 
 
 
 
COMM 313 Internship I - 3 credits 
COMM 390 International Media - 3 credits 
COMM 413 Internship II - 3 credits 
COMM 420 Diversity and Communication - 3 credits 
GRID 205 Graphic Design Illustration - 3 credits 
GRID 305 Typography I - 3 credits 
GRID 307 Graphic Design II - 3 credits 
MULT 470 Short Documentary - 3 credits 
PHOT 209 Body and the Lens - 3 credits 
PHOT 310 View Camera Techniques - 3 credits 
PHOT 322 Color Darkroom Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 340 Specialized Photography* - 3 credits 
PHOT 351 Digital Printing Methodology - 3 credits 
PHOT 360 Alternative Processes I - 3 credits 
PHOT 375 Self-Publishing the Photobook - 3 credits 
PHOT 380 Contemporary Portraiture - 3 credits 
PHOT 390 Advanced Photography** - 3 credits 
PHOT 490 Interdisciplinary Projects - 3 credits 
PHOT 295, 395, 495 Special Topics - 3 credits 
*PHOT 340 may be repeated up to 2 times for 6 credits total towards Major Electives. 
** PHOT 390 may be repeated up to 2 times for 6 credits total towards Major Electives. 

General Electives                                                                                            
Minimum credits for B.F.A. degree  

12 credits 
123 credits 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Public Relations, Advertising and Social Media 
Program Objectives  

1.  Research, write, and edit professional quality public relations and advertising materials. 
2.  Demonstrate an understanding of principles of media design, aesthetics, and composition. 
3.  Apply ethical and legal principles to integrated communications campaigns and programs. 
4.  Conduct and analyze primary and secondary research, including interpreting surveys, managing 

focus groups, and interpreting Web analytics. 

5.  Critically analyze the quality and effectiveness of advertising, public relations, marketing, and 

promotion campaigns. 

6.  Employ professional-level public relations and advertising skills to create campaigns to meet client 

needs. 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
PRAD 433 Advertising Competition - Senior Capstone OR  
PRAD 497 IMC Agency - Senior Capstone 

School of Communication BA Core 
COMM 105 Media & Society - 3 credits 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits 

203 

42 credits  

29 credits 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits  
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 300 Career Preparation Seminar - 1 credit 
COMM 311 Practicum - 1 credit   
COMM 412 Media Ethics and Responsibilities - 3 credits   
COMM 418 Communication Law and Regulation - 3 credits     
COMM 420 Diversity and Communication - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
PRAD 206 Introduction to PR/AD - 3 credits   
PRAD 239 Research for PR/AD - 3 credits   
PRAD 301 PR/AD Design and Management - 3 credits   
PRAD 306 Social Media Practices - 3 credits  
PRAD 321 PR/AD Writing - 3 credits  
PRAD 326 Integrated Marketing Communication Planning - 3 credits   
PRAD 453 Social Media Crisis and Strategic Communication - 3 credits 

PR/AD Concentration 
Choose four courses from the following: 
COMM 313 Internship I - 3 credits 
COMM 380 Cooperative Education - 6 credits 
COMM 390 International Media - 3 credits   
COMM 413 Internship II - 3 credits    
PRAD 327 Public Relations Issues and Practices - 3 credits 
PRAD 348 Sports Media and Marketing - 3 credits 
PRAD 416 Special Events Planning - 3 credits 
PRAD 463 Social Media Analytics and SEO - 3 credits 
PRAD 473 Social Media Campaigns - 3 credits 
PRAD 295, 395, 495 Special Topics - 3 credits 

Social Media Concentration 
PRAD 463 Social Media Analytics and SEO - 3 credits 
PRAD 473 Social Media Campaigns - 3 credits  
Choose two courses from the following: 
COMM 313 Internship I - 3 credits 
COMM 380 Cooperative Education - 6 credits 
COMM 390 International Media - 3 credits   
COMM 413 Internship II - 3 credits    
PRAD 327 Public Relations Issues and Practices - 3 credits 
PRAD 348 Sports Media and Marketing - 3 credits 
PRAD 416 Special Events Planning - 3 credits 

21 credits  

12 credits 

12 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

18 credits  
122 credits  

204 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Social Media Management  
Program Objectives  

1.  Research, write, and edit professional quality social media messages for multiple purposes. 
2.  Demonstrate an understanding of principles of media design, aesthetics, and composition. 
3.  Apply ethical and legal principles to social media messaging.  
4.  Create multimedia components for use on social media, including video, audio, and photography. 
5.  Critically analyze the quality and effectiveness of social media messages.  
6.  Employ professional-level social media content creation skills to meet client needs.  

42 credits  

36 credits 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
GRID 103 Graphic Design I - Discover Technology 
PRAD 497 IMC Agency - Senior Capstone  

Department Major Requirements  
COMM 412 Media Ethics and Responsibilities - 3 credits 
COMM 418 Communication Law and Regulation - 3 credits  
MKTS 205 Principles of Marketing and Sales - 3 credits 
MKTS 210 Digital Marketing - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 
PRAD 206 Introduction to PR/AD - 3 credits 
PRAD 321 PR/AD Writing - 3 credits 
PRAD 306 Social Media Practices - 3 credits 
PRAD 453 Social Media Crisis Communication - 3 credits 
PRAD 463 Social Media Analytics - 3 credits 
PRAD 473 Social Media Campaigns - 3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

42 credits  
120 credits  

Bachelor of Arts Degree in Sports Communication  
Program Objectives 

1.  Demonstrate skills in research, writing, editing, video production, and photography in the creation 

of sports communication materials.  

2.  Demonstrate principles of media design, aesthetics, and composition.  
3.  Apply ethical and legal principles to sports communication materials and practices. 
4.  Customize sports communications materials for a variety of audiences and messages. 
5.  Critically analyze the quality and effectiveness of sports communications materials and practices. 
6.  Employ professional-level sports communications skills to create content to meet client needs. 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core 
COMM 490 Media Entrepreneurship - Senior Capstone 

School of Communication BA Core 

205 

42 credits  

29 credits 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
COMM 105 Media & Society - 3 credits 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits 
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 300 Career Preparation Seminar - 1 credit 
COMM 311 Practicum - 1 credit   
COMM 412 Media Ethics and Responsibilities - 3 credits   
COMM 418 Communication Law and Regulation - 3 credits     
COMM 420 Diversity and Communication - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
PRAD 306 Social Media Practices - 3 credits 
SPTS 202 Introduction to Sports Communication - 3 credits 
SPTS 300 Sports Broadcasting - 3 credits 
SPTS 305 Sports PR and Advertising - 3 credits 
SPTS 320 Sports Podcasting - 3 credits 
SPTS 325 Sports Photography and Video - 3 credits 

Department Major Electives 
Choose 9 credits from the following: 
BPMM 223 Radio Production - 3 credits 
BPMM 303 Motion Graphics -3 credits 
*COMM 313 Internship I - 3 credits 
*COMM 380 Cooperative Education - 6 credits 
COMM 390 International Media - 3 credits 
*COMM 413 Internship II - 3 credits 
JOUR 317 On Camera Performance - 3 credits 
JOUR 324 Broadcast Announcing - 3 credits  
MULT 220 Writing for Multimedia and the Web - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
MULT 365 Web Publishing I - 3 credits 
PRAD 348 Sports Media and Marketing - 3 credits 
PRAD 416 Event Planning - 3 credits 
PRAD 463 Social Media Analytics & SEO - 3 credits 
SPTS 295, 395, 495 Special Topics - 3 credits 
* Only 6 hours total from 313, 380, and 413 can count towards major electives * 

18 credits 

9 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

24 credits  
122 credits  

Broadcast Production Certificate 
Program Objectives 

1.  Employ principles of aesthetics and composition. 
2.  Use industry-standard hardware and software to produce video and audio projects. 

206 

 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Evaluate and interpret the historical, business, and news environments in which broadcasters 

operate. 
Department Requirements 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
BPMM 202 Intro to Broadcasting - 3 credits 
BPMM 223 Radio Production - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Broadcast Reporting Certificate 
Program Objectives 

1.  Demonstrate adherence to the professional standards of broadcast writing. 
2.  Use industry-standard hardware and software to produce video and audio projects. 
3.  Evaluate and interpret the historical, business, and news environments in which broadcasters 

operate. 
Department Requirements 
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
JOUR 260 Newsgathering & Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 317 On Camera Performance - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Digital Journalism Certificate 
Program Objectives 

1.  Apply basic and advanced interview techniques, appropriate for professional journalistic work. 
2.  Demonstrate an ability to research and develop sources for reporting. 

Department Requirements 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits 
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
JOUR 260 Newsgathering & Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 340 Point Park News Service - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Graphic Design Certificate 
Program Objectives 

1.  Research, create, design, and produce materials for a variety of graphic and interactive design 

projects. 

2.  Demonstrate an understanding of design principles, aesthetics, and composition. 
3.  Demonstrate the ability to customize design projects for a variety of audiences and messages. 

207 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department Requirements 
GRID 103 Graphic Design I - 3 credits 
GRID 205 Graphic Design Illustration - 3 credits 
GRID 305 Typography I - 3 credits 
GRID 307 Graphic Design II - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Multimedia Certificate 
Program Objectives 

1.  Research, write, and edit materials for a variety of media platforms. 
2.  Demonstrate an understanding of principles of media design, aesthetics, and composition. 
3.  Demonstrate the ability to customize media materials for a variety of audiences and messages. 

Department Requirements 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
MULT 220 Writing for Multimedia and the Web - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
MULT 365 Web Publishing I - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Photography Certificate 
Program Objectives 

1.  Demonstrate an applied understanding of the visual language of photography and the ability to 

incorporate technical, formal, and conceptual competencies in their creative work with 
interpretation of other artistic media. 

2.  Professionally assess and critique (describe, interpret, evaluate, and theorize, articulated both 

verbally and in written form) one’s own photographs and those produced by others. 

Department Requirements 
PHOT 204 Film and Darkroom Photography I - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 316 Studio Lighting - 3 credits 
PHOT 350 Digital Image Editing - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Photojournalism Certificate 
Program Objectives 

1.  Demonstrate an understanding of principles of aesthetics and composition.  
2.  Apply basic and advanced interview techniques, appropriate for professional journalistic work. 

Department Requirements 

208 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
JOUR 302 Photojournalism I - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

Public Relations and Advertising Certificate 
Program Objectives 

1.  Research, write, and edit professional quality public relations and advertising materials.  
2.  Demonstrate an understanding of principles of media design, aesthetics, and composition. 
3.  Critically analyze the quality and effectiveness of advertising, public relations, and marketing 

programs. 

Department Requirements 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
PRAD 206 Introduction to PR/AD - 3 credits 
PRAD 306 Social Media Practices - 3 credits 
PRAD 326 Integrated Marketing Communication - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for Certificate 

12 credits 

School of Communication Minors 

The minors in the School of Communication listed below are available to all students at Point Park 

University. School of Communication minors consist of 18 credits.  

Students within the School of Communication may apply for a minor in another major area by taking 

four courses beyond their major requirements listed on every advising worksheet. All minors listed below are 
for students who are not majors in the School of Communication. 

Broadcast Production Minor (18 credits) 
COMM 105 Media and Society - 3 credits 
COMM 120 Visual Communication - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
BPMM 202 Introduction to Broadcasting - 3 credits 
Two broadcast production electives chosen in consultation with faculty advisor - 6 credits 

Broadcast Reporting Minor (18 credits) 
COMM 105 Media and Society - 3 credits 
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
BPMM 202 Introduction to Broadcasting - 3 credits 
JOUR 260 Newsgathering and Reporting - 3 credits 
One broadcast reporting elective chosen in consultation with faculty advisor - 3 credits 

209 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Culture & Entertainment Journalism Minor (18 credits) 
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
JOUR 257 Feature and Interpretive Writing - 3 credits 
JOUR 260 Newsgathering and Reporting - 3 credits 
JOUR 272 Culture and Entertainment Journalism - 3 credits 
Choose Two: 
ART 100 Introduction to the Visual Arts - 3 credits 
ART 305 Modern Art - 3 credits 
ART 306 American Art - 3 credits 
COMM 105 Media and Society - 3 credits 
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
GRID 103 Graphic Design I - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits  
SPTS 320 Sports Podcasting - 3 credits 

Digital Journalism Minor (18 credits) 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits   
COMM 115 Media Storytelling - 3 credits 
JOUR 260 Newsgathering and Reporting - 3 credits 
Three JOUR electives chosen in consultation with faculty advisor - 9 credits 

Graphic Design Minor (18 credits) 
GRID 103 Graphic Design I - 3 credits 
GRID 160 Graphic Design Thinking - 3 credits   
GRID 205 Graphic Design Illustration - 3 credits 
GRID 305 Typography I - 3 credits 
GRID 307 Graphic Design II - 3 credits  
Graphic design elective - 3 credits 

Mass Communication Minor (18 credits) 
COMM 105 Media and Society - 3 credits 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits   
BPMM 202 Introduction to Broadcasting - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 
PRAD 206 Introduction to PR/AD - 3 credits 

Multimedia Minor (18 credits) 
COMM 105 Media and Society - 3 credits 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits OR 

COMM 420 Media and Diversity - 3 credits  

MULT 220 Writing for Multimedia and the Web - 3 credits 
MULT 280 Introduction to Multimedia - 3 credits 
Choose Two: 
COMM 320 Information Graphics - 3 credits 

210 

 
 
 
 
 
JOUR 446 History of Documentary - 3 credits 
MULT 365 Web Publishing I - 3 credits 
PHOT 316 Studio Lighting - 3 credits 
PHOT 350 Digital Image Editing - 3 credits 

Painting and Drawing Minor (18 credits) 
ART 100 Introduction to the Visual Arts - 3 credits 
ART 213 Introduction to Drawing - 3 credits 
ART 216 Introduction to Painting 
ART 313 Advanced Drawing OR 

ART 320 Figure Drawing - 3 credits 

ART 321 Intermediate Painting - 3 credits 
PHOT 110 Foundations of Art & Design I - 3 credits 

Photography Minor (18 credits) 
PHOT 204 Film and Darkroom Photography I - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 316 Studio Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 350 Digital Image Editing - 3 credits 
Choose One: 
PHOT 400 Photographic Art Marketing - 3 credits 
PHOT 414 Professional Practices in Photography - 3 credits 
Choose One: 
PHOT 390 Advanced Photography - 3 credits 
PHOT 395 Special Topics in PHOT - 3 credits 
PHOT Elective with Coordinator/Faculty Approval - 3 credits 

Photojournalism Minor (18 credits) 
COMM 105 Media and Society - 3 credits 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits   
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
COMM 215 Video Storytelling - 3 credits 
JOUR 302 Photojournalism I - 3 credits 
PHOT 205 Digital Photography - 3 credits 

Public Relations, Advertising, and Social Media Minor (18 credits) 
COMM 110 Media Literacy - 3 credits  
COMM 120 Visual Storytelling - 3 credits 
PRAD 206 Introduction to PR/AD - 3 credits 
PRAD 326 Integrated Marketing Communication - 3 credits 
Two PRAD electives chosen in consultation with faculty advisor - 6 credits 

Graduate Studies  

The School of Communication offers four graduate degrees: a Master of Arts in Multimedia; a Master of 
Arts Degree in Media Communication; Master of Arts in Public Relations, Advertising, and Social Media; and 

211 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a concurrent Master of Arts Degree in Media Communication and Master of Business Administration Degree 
with the School of Business. Graduate catalogs are available from the Office of Graduate and Adult Enrollment 
or the department. For a graduate catalog or information, visit the website or please call Graduate Admissions 
Office at (412) 392-3808. 

School of Communication 4+1 BA/MA Programs 

The  School  of  Communication  is  pairing  the  majors  of  Broadcasting,  Digital  Journalism,  Multimedia, 
Photography, or Sports Communication with the  M.A. in Public Relations, Advertising, and Social Media. 
This  will  allow  the  student  to  earn  two  degrees  in  5  years. Twelve  hours  of  graduate  work  will  be  counted 
towards both the students’ undergraduate and graduate degrees. Students must carry a minimum 3.0 GPA and 
be admitted into the Graduate Program in order to pursue the degree.  

School of Communication Early Start Programs with the Rowland School of Business 

The School of Communication is partnering with the Rowland School of Business to offer “Early Start” 
into the RSOB’s Master’s programs. This will give students an opportunity to earn a bachelor’s degree in the 
following  areas: Broadcasting;  Graphic & Interactive  Design; Digital Journalism; Multimedia; Photography; 
Public Relations, Advertising, & Social Media; and Sports Communication while taking 6 credits towards a 

master’s program. 

212 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School of Continuing and Professional Studies 
Ms. Annie Shean, Managing Director, Online and Professional Studies 

Employees with appointments in the SCPS include: Annie Shean—Managing Director, Online and 
Professional Studies; Dr. Sean Martin—Department Chair; Naomi Jensen—Coordinator; Todd Slater—LMS 
Administrator/Instructional Technologist; Anthony Leone—Manager, Instructional Design; Chase Barron—
Senior Instructional Designer; Pam Quatchak—Director, Online Student Advising; Sally Polnyj—Online 
Student Advisor/Success Coach; Kaela Cardarella—Online Student Advisor/Success Coach 

The School of Continuing & Professional Studies (SCPS) connects learners with the knowledge, 
tools, and skills to pursue their educational and career aspirations through lifelong learning opportunities. 
SCPS’s mission is to provide interdisciplinary programs for learners looking to complete their degrees, as well 
as to provide for-credit and not-for-credit certificates and short learning programs (micro-credentials) for 
learners to improve or add needed workforce skills in pursuit of employability or personal advancement. The 
school delivers this mission in multiple modalities to a diverse community focusing on the lifetime needs of 
learners. 

In addition to the programs listed below, SCPS supports online education in Point Park’s other 

academic schools by providing instructional design/technology services, learning management system (LMS) 
maintenance/training, and academic advising for online students in certain programs.  

•  Brewing Science Academy (noncredit certificate program) 
•  Distilling Science Academy (noncredit certificate program) 
•  Winemaking Science Academy (noncredit certificate program) 
•  Esports Program Facilitator (noncredit certificate program) 
•  Bootcamps (noncredit certificate programs) 
• 

Professional Certification Preparation Programs (noncredit certificate programs) 

Brewing Science Academy (noncredit certificate) 
Program Director, Dr. Gregg Johnson 

The  Brewing  Science  Academy  consists  of  two  separate  courses,  Brewing  Science  I  and  Brewing 
Science II. Brewing Science I is offered annually in the summer. Brewing Science II is offered biannually to 
those who’ve earned the Brewing I certificate. 

Course Overview 

Brewing Science I 

The course is broken into four fundamental parts. It begins with a hands-on science course covering 
the science behind beer brewing, taught by Point Park University scientists in a lab setting. In the second part, 
designated  as  a  brewing  week,  students  work  in  teams  with  professional  brewing  mentors,  designing  and 
brewing beer to be entered into a competition. Part three focuses on the art and craft of brewing and is taught 
by beer  industry professionals primarily from the Pittsburgh area with a strong  representation from  Master 
Brewers Association of the Americas (MBAA) District Pittsburgh. The Brewing Science Academy closes with a 
brewing competition judging event where each team's beer is judged by the pros, and a best brew selected.   

This class is limited to 20 students. No prerequisites are required to participate; however, students 

must be at least 21 years of age by the program’s start date and have a strong passion to learn.  

213 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Topics and Activities: 

Fundamentals of Chemistry for Brewers 

• 
•  Carbon Chemistry 
•  Brewing Water 
•  Barley, Malting, and Mashing 
•  Hops and the Boil 
•  Yeast and Fermentation 
•  Brewhouse Operations 
•  Beer Design I 
• 
Sensory Analysis 
•  Yeast Management 
•  Cellaring and Packaging 
•  Brewery Mechanics and Physics 
•  Brewery Cleaning and Sanitizing 

Brewing Week 

•  Teams Collaborate with Professional Brewing Mentors 
•  Design and Brew Competition Beer 

* Days and times may vary depending on the availability of professional partners. Also note that some 
classes meet at area breweries. 

Brewing Science II 

A follow-up course to Brewing  Science I, this course covers advanced topics presented by industry 
professionals who specialize in the areas to be explored. Lab work focused on brewing lagers as well as standard 
scientific methods of beer analysis round out the experience. 

Topics and Activities: 

Sours and Non-Traditional Beers 

•  Brewing Lagers 
• 
•  Barrel-Aging Beer 
•  Off-Flavors and Brewery Troubleshooting 
•  Brewery QA/QC 
•  Advanced Recipe Design 
• 

Standard Methods of Analysis 

Prerequisites: Students must have completed Brewing Science I or have significant brewing experience. A 
resume or statement of brewing experience must be emailed to SCPS@pointpark.edu for review.  

Distilling Science Academy (noncredit certificate) 
Program Director, Dr. Gregg Johnson 

A  10-week,  hands-on  certificate  course  for  current  and  aspiring  distillers,  the  Distilling  Science 
Academy  trains  students  for  a  career  in  the  distilling  industry.  The  only  program  of  its  kind  in  Western 

214 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pennsylvania,  the  Distilling  Science  Academy  is  made  possible  trhough  collaborations  between  Point  Park 
faculty and distilling industry experts. 

Topics and Activities: 

Fermentation 

Production Methods and Styles 

•  An Overview of Distilling and Distilling History 
•  Raw Materials for Different Spirits 
•  Materials Processing 
• 
•  Malting and Mashing 
• 
•  Distillation Theory, Equipment, and Techniques 
•  Maturation 
•  Bench-top Distillation 
• 
Sensory Training 
• 
Packaging 
•  Opportunity to Work with Industrial Scale Equipment at Iron City Distilling 
• 

Field Trips to Area Distilleries 

This class is limited to 16 students. No prerequisites are required to participate; however, students must be at 
least 21 years old by the program’s start and have a strong passion to learn. 

Winemaking Science Academy (noncredit certificate) 
Program Director, Mr. Jeffrey J. Seaman 

The Winemaking Science Academy is a 10-week , hands-on certificate course designed for aspiring 
and  current  winemakers.  This  unique  initiative  bridges  the  gap  in  regional  viticulture  education, 
providing expert instruction, hands-on training, and industry connections to prepare students for winemaking 
careers. Students  who  successfully  finish  the  course  will  receive  a  certificate  of  completion from  Point  Park 
University. 

Topics and Activities: 

•  Winemaking Fundamentals: Understanding grape biology, fermentation science, and microbiology.   
• 
Sensory Evaluation & Tasting: Developing your palate, detecting faults, and assessing wine quality. 
•  Viticulture Practices: Explore modern challenges in grape cultivation, soil management, and climate 

adaptation.   

•  Winemaking Processes: Get hands-on with harvest, crushing, fermentation, and aging 

techniques. (Our partner Ripepi Vineyard will provide access to their harvest, picking up grapes, 
etc.)  

•  Equipment & Technology: Learn to operate the tools behind every great wine — from fermentation 

to bottling.  

•  Quality Control & Regulations: Gain insights into industry standards, compliance, and safety 

protocols.  

•  Regional & Stylistic Variations: Explore how geography, climate, and tradition shape winemaking 

styles.  

215 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 

Field Trips & Industry Immersion: Visit local vineyards and wineries to experience winemaking 
firsthand.  

This class is limited to 16 students. No prerequisites are required to participate; however, students must be at 
least 21 years old by the program’s start and have a strong passion to learn. 

Esports Program Facilitator (noncredit certificate) 
Program Director, Dr. Donald Marinelli 

Point Park University's Center for Experiential Narrative Technologies and School of Continuing and 
Professional Studies have joined forces to offer a new online certificate program in esports program facilitation. 
Designed  for educators,  administrators,  and  industry  professionals,  this  course  provides  a comprehensive 
overview  of  esports,  covering  its  history,  structure,  and  key  stakeholders,  before  diving  into tournament 
management and financial operations. With learning modules covering how to organize and execute successful 
esports events, from grassroots competitions to large-scale tournaments, as well as the money flow within the 
industry, including sponsorships, revenue models, prize pools and budget management, this program is perfect 
for those looking to fast-track their esports proficiency. Participants finish the coursework equipped with the 
essential  knowledge  and  skills  needed  to  integrate  esports  into  educational  settings,  student  programs,  and 
competitive organizations. 

This four-course certificate program cover the following topics: 

•  Course 1: Esports Fundamentals 
•  Course 2: Esports Digital Marketing and Consumer Engagement 
•  Course 3: Esports Coaching Skills 
•  Course 4: Esports Tournament Planning 

This class is limited to 20 students. No prerequisites are required to participate; however, students must be at 
least 18 years old by the program’s start and have a strong passion to learn. 

Bootcamps (noncredit) 
Ms. Annie Shean, Managing Director of Online and Professional Studies 

The University partners with StackRoute Learning to provide online technology bootcamps in the 

following areas: 

•  Artificial Intelligence 
•  Cloud Systems Administration 
•  Cyber Security 
• 

Software Development 

Each bootcamp has three tiers that lead to industry certifications: Foundational, Intermediate, and Advanced. 
Cohorts  start  on  a  quarterly  basis,  and  The  the  length  and  content  of  each  bootcamp  varies  per  tiery. 
Prerequisites include a high school diploma or equivalent, and a minimum age of 18 to register. Please contact 
SCPS@pointpark.edu for more information. 

216 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical Certification Preparation Programs (noncredit) 
Ms. Annie Shean, Managing Director of Online and Professional Studies 

The University partners with SkillStorm to provide online education programs to prepare students to 

take industry recogniized exams in the following areas: 

•  AWS Cloud Practitioner 
•  AWS Solutions Architect Associate 
•  Microsoft Azure AI Fundamentals 
•  Microsoft Azure AI Solutions 
•  CompTIA A+ 
•  CompTIA Network+ 
•  CompTIA Security+ 
•  CompTIA Project+ 
• 
• 

Salesforce Administrator 
PMI Project Management Professional 

Each program includes access to digital textbooks and labs, as well as a complimentary voucher for taking the 
certification exam. Course additions or changes to the menu of options can vary throughout the year. 
Cohorts start monthly, and the length of each course ranges between 4 and 8 weeks. Prerequisites include a 
high school diploma or equivalent, and a minimum age of 18 to register. Please contact 
SCPS@pointpark.edu for more information. 

217 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
The School of Education  
Virginia Chambers, Ed.D., Interim Dean 

School of Education 

A.A. - Education  
A.S. - Applied Science in Career and Technical Education 
B.A. - Pre-Kindergarten – Grade 4  
B.A. - Pre-Kindergarten – Grade 4 and Special Education (Pre-K – Grade 12) 
B.A. - Special Education (PreK– Grade12) 
B.A. - 4th – 8th Grade, English Concentration  
B.A. - 4th – 8th Grade, Mathematics Concentration  
B.A. - 4th – 8th Grade, Science Concentration  
B.A. - 4th – 8th Grade, Social Studies Concentration  
B.S. - Biological Sciences /Secondary Education  
B.A. - English/Secondary Education  
B.A. - English/Secondary Education & Special Education (PreK– Grade12)  
B.S. - Mathematics/Secondary Education  
B.S. - Mathematics/Secondary Education & Special Education (PreK– Grade12) 
B.A. - Social Studies / Secondary Education 
B.A. - Social Studies / Secondary Education & Special Education (PreK– Grade12) 
B.A. - Instructional Studies  
B.A. - Dance Education (PreK- Grade 12)  
B.A - PreK-4 Certification Residency Program 
B.A - Special Education PreK-12 Residency Program 
Certificate in Career and Technical Teaching in Practice (CTTP) 

School of Education 
Professors: Christal Edmunds, Ph.D.; Stanley Denton, Ph.D.; Janice Glunk, Ed.D.; Richard Gutkind, Ph.D.; 
Darlene Marnich, Ph.D.; Karen McIntyre, Ph.D.; Vincenne Revilla Beltran, Ph.D.; Arleen Wheat, Ed.D. 
Associate Professors: Linda Hippert, Ed.D. 
Assistant Professors: Kristen Misutka, Ph.D.; Kelly Pascarella, Ed.D.; Kamyrn York, Ed.D. (Chair); Richard 
Garris, Ph.D.; Michele Leyshon, Ed.D. 
Visiting Assistant Professor: Marybeth Irvin, Ph.D. 
Senior Lecturer: Denise Beverina Moore, M.A.; Elisabeth Ehrlich, Ed.D. 

The  School  of  Education  at  Point  Park  University  offers  a  wide  array  of  undergraduate  programs 
covering  elementary,  middle  level,  secondary,  and  special  education  —  with  the  opportunity  for  special 
education dual certification for elementary and select secondary education certification programs — as well as 
programs in instructional studies. 

The School is focused on student success and a practical approach to education theory. Its mission is 
to prepare students to assume their roles as instructional leaders and teachers. This is accomplished through 
hands-on  coursework,  evaluation,  and  experiences  relating  to  content  knowledge,  pedagogy,  academic 
standards, and professional competencies through a wide variety of field experiences, evaluations, exposure to 
educational materials and teaching strategies, technologies, and assessment practices.  

218 

 
 
 
 
  
The goal is to develop quality, innovative, holistic, humanistic programs in which students majoring in 
education  can  acquire  knowledge  of  subject  areas  and  specific  pedagogical  methodologies  appropriate  for 
teaching those subjects with a special emphasis on the interconnection among all subjects as well as facts, skills, 
and attitudes.  

From the first education course that students take, classroom observations will be required. Professors will 
work with students to develop instructional projects that will best help each individual meet their Pennsylvania 
teacher certification goal. The faculty and staff in the School of Education form relationships with students to 
better guide them through their chosen academic program.  

Application to the School of Education 

After completing 48 credit hours, all students must apply for admission into teacher certification programs 
offered  through  Education.  Admission  requirements  include  the  following:  documentation  of  at  least  40 
observation hours, an overall 3.0 G.P.A., successful completion of the following: six credits of university-level 
English/Literature, six credits of university-level mathematics, nine credits of EDUC or SPED courses (100 or 
200 level) with a minimum of a 3.0.  In addition, students must have the following clearances: Criminal Record 
Check (Act 34) clearance, Child Abuse History (Act 151) clearance, FBI clearance and Mandated  Reporter 
Certificate. Prior to admission into the School of Education, students are classified as “Education Undeclared” 
majors. Students can obtain an application for admission to the School of Education from the school office or 
the University website: www.pointpark.edu/education. 

School of Education majors are expected to plan for assignments in observation/exploration activities and 
field experiences, culminating with supervised student teaching in the final semester. All programs leading to 
PA teacher certification require  completion of 40 hours of  observation/exploration and 150 hours of field 
experiences prior to student teaching. Observation/Exploration and Field Experiences must be completed in 
a  variety  of  settings,  grade  level  types,  teaching  situations,  and  activities  that  contribute  significantly  to  the 
enrichment of the students’ experiences. In order for an activity to be considered “field experience,” there must 
be evidence of interaction with students. Examples of field experience activities include, but are not limited to, 
small group instruction, presentation of learning centers, tutoring, etc. A majority of the required observation 
and field experience hours are completed during coursework. 

Application for Student Teaching  
        All students applying for student teaching placements must be admitted to the School of Education prior 
to submitting their application. Before student teaching, all students must join the Student Teaching Canvas 
Class then complete and submit the “Application for Student Teaching Placement” form in Canvas by the date 
due. The  candidates are required to attend the group meeting  to discuss student teaching  and schedule an 
individual meeting with the Director of Student Teaching. When making the application, students will request 
an  area for the student teaching  experience.  All required artifacts need to be  submitted  to  the Director of 
Student Placements via Canvas prior to the student teacher candidate receiving placement information.   
      Prerequisites for Student Teaching include the following: full acceptance into the School of Education; 
overall 3.0 G.P.A.; completion and documentation of all coursework and observation/exploration and field 
experiences;  current  FBI  criminal  background  check,  current  Act  34  and  151  clearances;  Negative  TB  test; 
Recognizing  and  Reporting  Child  Abuse:  Mandated  and  Permissive  Reporting  in  Pennsylvania  Training 
Certificate along with other requirements. Additional information is available from the School of Education. 
Student teaching placements are made by the Director of Student Teaching, who has the final decision on 
making these assignments. 

Application for PA Certification  

219 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In order to be eligible for teacher certification through the Pennsylvania Department of Education, the 
student must successfully complete all coursework of the program as well as maintain a minimum GPA of 3.0, 
pass the required professional exam(s), and demonstrate competence in student teaching. Point Park monitors 
the  progress  of  teacher  certification  candidates  through  their  performance  in  the  following  areas:  content 
mastery, planning, classroom management, organization, monitoring student progress, leadership, sensitivity 
to students’ needs, problem analysis, strategic and tactical decision making; oral and written communication 
and presentation; professional standards and practice; and mastery of instructional technology. Students must 
successfully complete all Pennsylvania Department of Education (PDE) requirements.  
  Once these standards have been met, the graduate is eligible to apply to the Pennsylvania Department of 
Education through the Teacher Information Management System (TIMS) for their teaching certificate, then 
may be endorsed by the University.  

All School of Education requirements are subject to changes in state and federal regulations.  

Students may complete programs towards certification in Pre-K through Grade 4; Grades 4 – 8, Special 
Education,  and  Dance  Education:  Academic  concentrations  in  English,  Mathematics,  Science,  or  Social 
Studies, or Secondary Education, including Biological Sciences, English, Mathematics, or Social Studies. Also, 
students have the option to simultaneously complete all Pennsylvania Department of Education requirements 
for Special Education certification (Pre-K through Grade 12) in most of our certification programs.   

Education  offers  two  programs  that  fulfill  community  needs  but  do  not  lead  to  certification  by  the 
Commonwealth  of  Pennsylvania.  The  first,  the  Associate  in  Arts  degree,  prepares  students  to  enter  the 
profession as teacher’s aides, or work in Child Care settings. Most courses completed through the Associate in 
Arts degree are applicable to the Bachelor of Arts degree with a major in Education leading to PA certification 
in  Pre-K  through  Grade  4.  The  second  is  the  Bachelor  of  Arts  with  a  major  in  Instructional  Studies.  This 
program requires 30 credits of general college electives.  This gives every student the opportunity to complete 
a  minor  of  their  choice.  Some  opportunities  for  graduates  of  Instructional  Studies  include  public  school 
paraprofessional,  private  schools  not  requiring  PDE  certification,  extended  school  programs,  community 
centers,  youth  services  agencies,  and  profit  and  nonprofit  organizations  focused  on  children,  youth,  and 
families.  

Programs Leading to Certification  

Pre-Kindergarten - Grade 4 
Pre-Kindergarten - Grade 4 Residency Program 
Pre-Kindergarten - Grade 4 and Special Education (Pre-K - Grade 12) 
4th – 8th Grade, English Concentration 
4th – 8th Grade, Mathematics Concentration  
4th – 8th Grade, Science Concentration  
4th – 8th Grade, Social Studies Concentration  
Biological Sciences/Secondary Education  
English/Secondary Education  
English/Secondary Education and Special Education (Pre-K – Grade 12)  
Mathematics/Secondary Education  
Mathematics/Secondary Education and Special Education (Pre-K – Grade 12)  
Social Studies/Secondary Education 
Social Studies/Secondary Education and Special Education (Pre-K – Grade 12) 
Dance Education (Pre-K through Grade 12) 

220 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Special Education (Pre-K through Grade 12) 
Special Education (Pre-K through Grade 12) Residency Program 

Certification Options for Special Education: Pre-K through Grade 12  

The Special Education Certification (Pre-K through Grade 12) can be completed in two ways: as a single 
certification program or as a dual certification that is combined with either PreK - Grade 4 or selected secondary 
programs. These dual certifications will allow the candidate to teach in a special education setting, or accept a 
teaching assignment in a regular classroom setting that matches their chosen certification grade and content 
band.  

The program design will provide candidates with skills, knowledge, and competencies necessary to meet 
the  needs  of  students  with  disabilities  in  multiple  settings.  Candidates  will  demonstrate  knowledge  and 
competence in the areas of academic, social, and  emotional growth, and methods to use that knowledge to 
maximize a student’s capabilities. All Special Education dual certification programs have been designed to be 
accomplished in a four-year period. Included are seven semesters of coursework and a final (eighth) semester 
for the student teaching practicum and student teaching seminar.  

Education  
Associate of Arts Degree with a major in Education  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements  

Department Major Requirements  
Math Elective - 3 credits 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - 3 credits 
EDUC 150 Introduction to Teaching Profession - 3 credits 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - 3 credits  
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature - 3 credits 

39 credits  

21 credits  

Minimum credits for A.A. degree  

60 credits  

Associate of Science Degree with a major in Applied Science in Career and 
Technical Education  

221 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Associate of Science Program in Applied Science for CTE at Point Park University is designed for 
people  seeking  both  a  post-secondary  credential  and  statewide  certification  to  teach  occupational  skills  in 
approved career  and technical education (CTE) programs in the  Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Like the 
individual certification pathways, this program prepares educators with industry experience to transition to 
teaching roles in secondary CTE settings, equipping them with the pedagogical skills necessary to deliver high 
quality technical instruction. 

The program provides flexible learning as courses are online with optional "live stream" sessions offered. 
The courses are suitable for working professionals and create meaningful pedagogical content applicable to the 
career and technical environment. 

The Associate of Science Program in Applied Science for CTE at Point Park University is approved by the 

Pennsylvania Department of Education (PDE) and meets the requirements for CTE teacher certification. 

College Level Coursework for initial CTE Instructional I Certification requires successful completion of 
18 credits. College Level Coursework for CTE Instructional II Certification requires an additional 42 credits. 
Successful  completion  of  both  CTE  Instructional  I  and  CTE  Instructional  II  Certification  coursework 

requirements will lead to an Associate Degree in Education from Point Park University. 

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

18 credits  

42 credits  

CTE Instructional I Certification  
EDUC 105 CTE Introduction to Teaching - 3 credits 
EDUC 106 CTE Classroom Management - 3 credits 
EDUC 107 CTE Differentiated Institutional Practices - 3 credits  
EDUC 108 CTE Assessment Strategies - 3 credits  
EDUC 109 CTE Instructional Planning - 3 credits  
EDUC 110 CTE Content Literacy - 3 credits 

CTE Instructional II Certification  
EDUC 200 CTE Learners with Diverse Needs - 3 credits 
EDUC 201 CTE Student Wellness and Resilience - 3 credits 
EDUC 205 CTE Math for Educators - 3 credits  
EDUC 206 CTE Inquiry Based Learning - 3 credits  
EDUC 207 CTE Psychology of Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 208 CTE Composition and Communication - 3 credits 
EDUC 209 CTE Technological Applications and Trends - 3 credits 
EDUC 211 CTE Curriculum Design and Implementation - 3 credits 
EDUC 212 CTE Program Evaluation and Improvement - 3 credits 
EDUC 213 CTE Industry Partnerships - 3 credits 
EDUC 214 CTE Leadership and Advocacy - 3 credits 
EDUC 215 CTE Legal and Ethical Issues - 3 credits 
EDUC 216 CTE Professional Teaching Practicum - 6 credits 

222 

 
 
 
 
 
Minimum credits for A.S. degree  

60 credits  

Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 4  

Point Park University’s School of Education strives to prepare tomorrow’s Pre-K through Grade 4 teachers 
to serve and value a diverse group of young children and families. The curriculum has been developed to meet 
the needs of children through Grade 4. In order to meet these needs, as well as the Pennsylvania Department 
of Education’s requirements for certification, this program focuses on: Child Development, Cognition, and 
Learning;  Subject  Matter  Content  and  Pedagogy;  Assessment;  Family  and  Community  Collaboration 
Partnerships;  Professionalism;  and  Adaptations  and  Accommodations  for  Diverse  Students  in  an  Inclusive 
Setting and Meeting the Needs of English Language Learners. Additionally, students are encouraged to prepare 
for and complete testing to add on grades 5 and 6. Pre-K through Grade 4 certification students can also apply 
for their STEM endorsement certificate through PDE once they have completed the Pre-K through Grade 4 
program and earn their Instructional I Certificate. 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Education  
Leading to PA Certification Pre-K through Grade 4  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving - Investigate Mathematics 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature - Interpret Creative Works 
EDUC 251 Arts and Music in Teaching - Appreciate and Apply the Arts 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

42 credits  

Department General Requirements 
Mathematics Requirement (3)  
MATH 155 General Mathematics - 3 credits  

Social Sciences Requirement (6) 
HIST 382 History of Pennsylvania: Focus on Pittsburgh - 3 credits 
POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits 

9 credits  

Education Requirements 

66 credits  

223 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EDUC 120 Building Family Partnerships - 3 credits  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 302 Reading Methods I - 3 credits  
EDUC 303 Reading Methods II - 3 credits  
EDUC 305 Methods of Mathematics I - 3 credits  
EDUC 308 Teaching Social Studies - 3 credits  
EDUC 310 Teaching Science and Health - 3 credits  
EDUC 315 Methods of Teaching Mathematics II - 3 credits  
EDUC 330 Educational Theories and Practices - 3 credits  
EDUC 335 Program Development, Leadership and Organizational Change - 3 credits  
EDUC 401 Differentiated Reading for the Developing Child - 3 credits  
EDUC 411 Integrated Curriculum and Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits  

General Elective 
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

3 credits 
120 credits 

* EDUC 101, EDUC 303, EDUC 310, and EDUC 315 are courses approved for the PA STEM 
Endorsement. Students can apply for their STEM endorsement certificate once they have completed the 
Pre-K - 4 program and earn their Instructional I Certificate.  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Education Leading to PA Certification Pre-K 
through Grade 4 and Special Education Pre-K through 12 

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements 

42 credits  

224 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving - Investigate Mathematics 
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature-Interpret - Creative Works 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 251 Arts and Music in Teaching - Appreciate and Apply the Arts 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

9 credits  

57 credits  

27 credits  

Department General Requirements 
Mathematics Requirements (3)  
MATH 155 General Mathematics - 3 credits  

Social Sciences Requirement (6)  
HIST 382 History of Pennsylvania: Focus on Pittsburgh - 3 credits  
POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements 
EDUC 120 Building Family Partnerships - 3 credits  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 302 Reading Methods I - 3 credits  
EDUC 303 Reading Methods II - 3 credits  
EDUC 305 Methods of Mathematics I - 3 credits  
EDUC 308 Teaching Social Studies - 3 credits  
EDUC 310 Teaching Science and Health - 3 credits  
EDUC 315 Methods of Teaching Mathematics II - 3 credits  
EDUC 330 Educational Theories and Practices - 3 credits  
EDUC 335 Program Development, Leadership, and Organizational Change - 3 credits  
EDUC 401 Differentiated Reading for the Developing Child - 3 credits  
EDUC 411 Integrating Curriculum and Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  

Special Education Requirements 
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 220 Instructional/Assistive Technology - 3 credits 
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 281 High Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits 
SPED 282 Low Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 
SPED 381 Secondary Transitions - 3 credits  
SPED 382 Autism Spectrum Disorders - 3 credits 
SPED 481 Intensive Reading, Writing, and Math Interventions - 3 credits  

General Elective 

3 credits 

225 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

138 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Special Education Pre-K through  
Grade 12 

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators. 

Core Requirements 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving - Investigate Mathematics 
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature Interpret - Creative Works 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 251 Arts and Music in Teaching - Appreciate and Apply the Arts 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

42 credits  

66 credits  

Department Major Requirements 
EDUC 120 Building Family Partnerships - 3 credits  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 305 Methods of Mathematics I - 3 credits OR 

EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits 

EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary School - 3 credits 
EDUC 401 Differentiated Reading for the Developing Child - 3 credits 
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
MATH 155 General Mathematics - 3 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 220 Instructional/Assistive Technology - 3 credits 
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 281 High Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits 
SPED 282 Low Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits  

226 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 
SPED 381 Secondary Transitions - 3 credits  
SPED 382 Autism Spectrum Disorders - 3 credits 
SPED 481 Intensive Reading, Writing, and Math Interventions - 3 credits  

General Electives                                                                                                                    12 credits 
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

120 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Grades 4 Through 8  

Point  Park  University’s  School  of  Education  strives  to  prepare  tomorrow’s  Grades  4  through  Grade  8 
teachers.  The  curriculum  has  been  developed  to  give  each  teacher  candidate  the  choice  of  academic 
concentrations  (English,  Mathematics,  Science,  or  Social  Studies).  The  candidate  will  choose  their  area  of 
interest as their academic concentration (30 credits) and then round out their credentials with a minimum of 
12 credits in each of the other academic areas. In providing this type of program, the candidate will be prepared 
to teach in either an elementary classroom (Grades 4 and up) or in a middle level classroom that focuses on 
their academic concentration. These programs address the broad set of issues, knowledge, and competencies 
that are relevant to middle level teaching and learning. In order to meet these needs, as well as the Pennsylvania 
Department  of  Education’s  requirements  for  certification,  this  program  focuses  on:  Mastery  of  Academic 
Standards and Content, Pedagogy, Assessment Anchors, and Adaptations and Accommodations for Diverse 
Students in an Inclusive Setting and Meeting the Needs of English Language Learners.  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Education  
Leading to PA Certification Grades 4 through 8 Academic Concentration: English  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

42 credits  

Core Requirements 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
INES 175 Introduction to International Studies - Explore the World  
POLS 205 World Geography - Explore the World 
NSET 110 Introduction to Physical and Space Science - Investigate Science 
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving - Investigate Mathematics 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - Succeed in Business 
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature - Interpret Creative Works 

227 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 251 Arts and Music in Teaching - Appreciate and Apply the Arts 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

Department General Requirements 
English/Language Arts Requirements (15)  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary Schools - 3 credits 
ENGL 250, 251, 252, 253, 254, OR 255 - 3 credits 
ENGL 300 Level Literature Course - 3 credits 
ENGL 302 Introduction to Linguistics - 3 credits  
ENGL 365, 366 OR 367 - 3 credits 

45 credits  

Mathematics Requirements (12)  
EDUC 315 Methods of Teaching Mathematics II -3 credits  
MATH 155 General Mathematics - 3 credits  
MATH 165 Basic Algebra - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  

Science Requirements (9)  
EDUC 310 Teaching Science and Health - 3 credits 
NSET 111 Introduction to the Life Sciences - 3 credits 
NSET 160 Environmental Science - 3 credits  

Social Studies Requirement (9)  
EDUC 308 Teaching Social Studies - 3 credits 
HIST 203 History of U.S. I - 3 credits  
POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits   

Department Major Requirements 
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits 
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 

General Elective 
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  

228 

36 credits  

3 credits 
126 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Education  
Leading to PA Certification Grades 4 through 8 Academic Concentration: Mathematics  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies. 
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

42 credits  

Core Requirements 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
INES 175 Introduction to International Studies - Explore the World 
POLS 205 World Geography - Explore the World 
NSET 110 Introduction to Physical and Space Science - Investigate Science 
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving - Investigate Mathematics  
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - Succeed in Business  
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature - Interpret Creative Works 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 251 Arts and Music in Teaching - Appreciate and Apply the Arts 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

Department General Requirements 
English/Language Arts Requirements (6)  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary Schools - 3 credits 
ENGL 250, 251, 252, 253, 254, OR 255 - 3 credits 

45 credits  

Mathematics Requirements (21)  
EDUC 315 Methods of Mathematics II - 3 credits 
MATH 155 General Mathematics - 3 credits  
MATH 165 Basic Algebra - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  
MATH 180 College Algebra - 3 credits 
MATH 185 Trigonometry - 2 credits 
MATH 190 Calculus - 4 credits 

Science Requirements (9)  
EDUC 310 Teaching Science and Health - 3 credits 
NSET 111 Introduction to the Life Sciences - 3 credits 

229 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NSET 160 Environmental Science - 3 credits  

Social Studies Requirement (9)  
EDUC 308 Teaching Social Studies - 3 credits 
HIST 203 History of U.S. I - 3 credits  
POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits 

36 credits  

Department Major Requirements 
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits 
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 

General Elective 
Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

3 credits 
126 credits 

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Education  
Leading to PA Certification Grades 4 through 8 Academic Concentration: Science  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
INES 175 Introduction to International Studies - Explore the World 
POLS 205 World Geography - Explore the World 
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - Investigate Science 
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving - Investigate Mathematics 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - Succeed in Business  

230 

42 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature - Interpret Creative Works 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 251 Arts and Music in Teaching - Appreciate and Apply the Arts 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

Department General Requirements 
English/Language Arts Requirements (6)  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary Schools - 3 credits 
ENGL 250, 251, 252, 253, 254, OR 255 - 3 credits 

45 credits  

Mathematics Requirements (12)  
EDUC 315 Methods of Teaching Mathematics II - 3 credits 
MATH 155 General Mathematics - 3 credits  
MATH 165 Basic Algebra - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  

Science Requirements (18)  
BIOL 101 General Biology I - 3 credits  
BIOL 102 General Biology II - 3 credits  
BIOL 103 General Biology Laboratory I - 1 credit  
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  
EDUC 310 Teaching Science and Health - 3 credits 
NSET 160 Environmental Science - 3 credits  
PHYS 101 Physics I - 3 credits  
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  

Social Studies Requirements (9) 
EDUC 308 Teaching Social Studies - 3 credits 
HIST 203 History of U.S. I - 3 credits  
POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits 

36 credits  

Department Major Requirements  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptations - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits 
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits  

General Elective 
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

3 credits 
126 credits  

231 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Education 
Leading to PA Certification Grades 4 through 8 Academic Concentration: Social Studies  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

42 credits 

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
INES 175 Introduction to International Studies - Explore the World 
POLS 205 World Geography - Explore the World 
NSET 110 Introduction to Physical and Space Science - Investigate Science 
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving - Investigate Mathematics 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - Succeed in Business  
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature - Interpret Creative Works 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 251 Arts and Music in Teaching - Appreciate and Apply the Arts 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

Department General Requirements 
English/Language Arts Requirements (6)  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary Schools - 3 credits 
ENGL 250, 251, 252, 253, 254, OR 255 - 3 credits 

45 credits  

Mathematics Requirements (12)  
EDUC 315 Methods of Teaching Mathematics II -3 credits 
MATH 155 General Mathematics - 3 credits  
MATH 165 Basic Algebra - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  

Science Requirements (9)  
EDUC 310 Teaching Science and Health - 3 credits 
NSET 111 Introduction to the Life Sciences - 3 credits 
NSET 160 Environmental Science - 3 credits 

232 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Studies Requirements (18) 
EDUC 308 Teaching Social Studies - 3 credits 
HIST 203 History of U.S. I - 3 credits  
HIST 204 History of the U.S. II - 3 credits  
HIST 382 History of Pennsylvania: Focus on Pittsburgh - 3 credits  
POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits 
POLS 202 State and Local Government - 3 credits  

36 credits  

Department Major Requirements  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptations - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits 
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits 
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits  

General Elective 
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

3 credits 
126 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Secondary Education 
Biology; English*; Mathematics*; Social Studies*  
*Select Secondary Education Programs also available with Dual Certification in Special Education Grades 7 - 12  

Point  Park  University  provides  preparation  for  and  meets  certification  requirements  in  a  number  of 
Secondary  Education  areas  through  the  following  baccalaureate  programs:  Biology/Secondary  Education, 
English/Secondary Education, Mathematics/Secondary Education, and Social Studies/Secondary Education. 
Upon completion of these programs, students receive the appropriate baccalaureate degrees. In addition, with 
a  minimum  G.P.A  of  3.0  and  successful  completion  of  the  required  PRAXIS  exams,  and  demonstrated 
competence in student teaching, students are eligible to apply for the Instructional I certificate issued for the 
major area of study by the Department of Education of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.  

Emphasizing the role of the specialist in today’s educational system, the programs leading to certification 
at  the  Secondary  level  allow  students  to  integrate  particular  academic  disciplines  with  a  comprehensive 
knowledge of appropriate teaching/learning strategies. Each of these programs is designed for those individuals 
wishing to teach in a public school system.   

Preparation for teachers in Secondary Education is a cooperative effort between the School of Education 
and the Academic Departments in which the students plan to become certified. Each student will work with 

233 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two advisors: one from the School of Education and one from the department of the academic content area. 
Through  the  dual  advisor  relationship,  students  are  able  to  best  understand  the  sequence  of  the  academic 
courses as well as the information that is necessary to ensure that all state standards are met for Pennsylvania 
Department  of  Education  certification.  These  advisors  coordinate  the  work  of  their  academic  content  and 
departments with the School of Education. All secondary education majors should meet  with both of their 
academic advisors before finalizing their schedule with the Center for Student Success. It is also recommended, 
that the student meet on a regular basis with their advisor to review their progress toward meeting all state 
standards.   

Biological Sciences / Secondary Education 
Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Biological Sciences / Secondary Education  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - Investigate Science 
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 
*Interpret Creative Works class must be a literature course. 

42 credits  

Department General Requirements  
BIOL 101 General Biology I - 3 credits  
BIOL 102 General Biology II - 3 credits  
BIOL 103 General Biology Laboratory I - 1 credit  
BIOL 104 General Biology Laboratory II - 1 credit  
CHEM 102 General Chemistry II - 3 credits  
CHEM 103 General Chemistry Laboratory I - 1 credit  
CHEM 104 General Chemistry Laboratory II - 1 credit  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  

Department Major Requirements  
BIOL 205 Botany - 4 credits  
BIOL 206 Zoology - 4 credits  
BIOL 211 Human Biology - 3 credits  
BIOL 216 Introductory Microbiology - 4 credits  
BIOL 222 Introduction to Genetics - 4 credits  

234 

16 credits  

32 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
BIOL 235 Introduction to Ecology - 3 credits  
BIOL 341 Environmental Health - 3 credits  
CHEM 221 Organic Chemistry - 3 credits  
PHYS 101 Physics I - 3 credits  
PHYS 103 Physics Laboratory I - 1 credit  

39 credits  

Education Requirements  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary Schools - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits  
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits 
EDUC 425 Student Teacher Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

129 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

English / Secondary Education  
Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in English / Secondary Education  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature - Interpret Creative Works 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

42 credits  

Department General Requirements  

9 credits  

235 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Humanities and Social Sciences (6)  
ENGL 250 World Literature: Drama, Poetry, Epic - 3 credits OR 
ENGL 251 World Literature: Novels - 3 credits 

ENGL 252, 253, 254, 255 or 295 - 3 credits  

Natural Sciences (3)  
MATH elective - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
ENGL 260 British Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 261 British Literature II - 3 credits 
ENGL 262 American Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 263 American Literature II - 3 credits 
ENGL 300 level or above - 3 credits 
ENGL 300 level or above - 3 credits 
ENGL 302 Introduction to Linguistics - 3 credits  
ENGL 305 Authors I - 3 credits 
ENGL 338 Literary Criticism - 3 credits  
ENGL 365,366, OR 367 - 3 credits 

Education Requirements  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits 
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary School - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits    
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits 
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 

30 credits  

39 credits  

Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

120 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Bachelor of Arts Degree Leading to Dual Certification in  
English / Secondary Education and Special Education (PreK- Grade12)  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  

236 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
EDUC 252 Children’s Literature - Interpret Creative Works 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

42 credits  

Department General Requirements  
Humanities and Social Sciences (6)  
ENGL 250 World Literature: Drama, Poetry, Epic - 3 credits OR 
ENGL 251 World Literature: Novels - 3 credits 

ENGL 252, 253, 254, 255 or 295 - 3 credits  

Natural Sciences (3)  
MATH elective - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
ENGL 260 British Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 261 British Literature II - 3 credits 
ENGL 262 American Literature I - 3 credits 
ENGL 263 American Literature II - 3 credits 
ENGL 300 level or above - 3 credits 
ENGL 300 level or above - 3 credits 
ENGL 302 Introduction to Linguistics - 3 credits  
ENGL 305 Authors I - 3 credits 
ENGL 338 Literary Criticism - 3 credits  
ENGL 365,366, OR 367 - 3 credits 

Education Requirements  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits 
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary Schools - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits    
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits 
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  

Special Education Requirements  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 220 Instructional/Assistive Technology - 3 credits  

237 

9 credits  

30 credits  

30 credits  

27 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 281 High Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits  
SPED 282 Low Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices for the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits  
SPED 381 Secondary Transitions - 3 credits  
SPED 382 Autism Spectrum Disorders - 3 credits 
SPED 481 Intensive Reading, Writing, and Math Interventions - 3 credits  

Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

138 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Mathematics / Secondary Education  
Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Mathematics / Secondary Education  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 
*Interpret Creative Works class must be a literature course. 

42 credits  

Department General Requirements  
Natural Sciences (3)  
EGR 101 Introduction to Engineering - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  
MATH 185 Trigonometry - 2 credits  
MATH 190 Calculus I - 4 credits  
MATH 210 Calculus II - 4 credits  
MATH 220 Discrete Mathematics - 3 credits  

238 

3 credits  

32 credits  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
MATH 230 Linear Algebra I - 3 credits  
MATH 300 Calculus III - 4 credits  
MATH 310 Differential Equations - 3 credits  
MATH 340 Modern Applied Algebra - 3 credits  
MATH 410 Geometry - 3 credits  

39 credits  

Education Requirements  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits 
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary Schools - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits  
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits 
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 

General Electives  
Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

6 credits  
122 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Bachelor of Science Degree with a major in Mathematics / Secondary Education  
and Special Education (PreK- Grade12) 

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
MATH 180 College Algebra - Investigate Mathematics 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 
*Interpret Creative Works class must be a literature course. 

42 credits  

239 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 credits  

32 credits  

30 credits  

27 credits  

Department General Requirements  
Natural Sciences (3)  
EGR 101 Introduction to Engineering - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  
MATH 185 Trigonometry - 2 credits  
MATH 190 Calculus I - 4 credits  
MATH 210 Calculus II - 4 credits  
MATH 220 Discrete Mathematics - 3 credits  
MATH 230 Linear Algebra I - 3 credits  
MATH 300 Calculus III - 4 credits  
MATH 310 Differential Equations - 3 credits  
MATH 340 Modern Applied Algebra - 3 credits  
MATH 410 Geometry - 3 credits  

Education Requirements  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits 
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary Schools - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits    
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits 
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  

Special Education Requirements  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 220 Instructional/Assistive Technology - 3 credits 
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 281 High Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits  
SPED 282 Low Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices for the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits  
SPED 381 Secondary Transitions - 3 credits 
SPED 382 Autism Spectrum Disorders - 3 credits  
SPED 481 Intensive Reading, Writing, and Math Interventions - 3 credits  

Minimum credits for B.S. degree  

134 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Social Studies / Secondary Education  

240 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Social Studies / Secondary Education  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

42 credits  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
HIST 201 History of Western Civilization I - Explore the World 
HIST 202 Western Civilization since the Sixteenth Century - Explore the World 
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving - Investigate Mathematics 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - Succeed in Business  
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 
*Interpret Creative Works class must be a literature course. 

Department General Requirements  
Natural Sciences (3)  
MATH elective - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics - 3 credits 
ECON 421 International Economics - 3 credits  
GCS 225 Anthropology of Belief - 3 credits OR 

POLS 290 Human Rights in Theory & Practice - 3 credits 

HIST 203 History of the U.S. I - 3 credits  
HIST 204 History of the U.S. II - 3 credits  
HIST 382 History of Pennsylvania: Focus on Pittsburgh - 3 credits  
INES 175 Introduction to International Studies - 3 credits  
POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits 
POLS 205 World Geography - 3 credits  
POLS 335 American Foreign Policy - 3 credits OR 
POLS 372 International Relations - 3 credits  

POLS 402 Constitutional Law - 3 credits  
PSYC 313 Social Psychology - 3 credits 

Education Requirements  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits 
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  

241 

3 credits  

36 credits  

39 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary School - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits    
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits 
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

120 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in  
Social Studies / Secondary Education and Special Education (PreK- Grade12)   

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

42 credits  

Core Requirements  
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
HIST 201 History of Western Civilization I - Explore the World 
HIST 202 Western Civilization since the Sixteenth Century - Explore the World 
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving - Investigate Mathematics 
ECON 202 Principles of Microeconomics - Succeed in Business  
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - Understand People 
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 
*Interpret Creative Works class must be a literature course. 

Department General Requirements  
Natural Sciences (3)  
MATH 100+ level - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements  
ECON 201 Principles of Macroeconomics - 3 credits 
ECON 421 International Economics - 3 credits  

242 

3 credits  

36 credits  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCS 225 Anthropology of Belief - 3 credits OR 

POLS 290 Human Rights in Theory & Practice - 3 credits 

HIST 203 History of the U.S. I - 3 credits  
HIST 204 History of the U.S. II - 3 credits  
HIST 382 History of Pennsylvania: Focus on Pittsburgh - 3 credits  
INES 175 Introduction to International Studies - 3 credits  
POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits 
POLS 205 World Geography - 3 credits  
POLS 335 American Foreign Policy - 3 credits OR 
POLS 372 International Relations - 3 credits  

POLS 402 Constitutional Law - 3 credits  
PSYC 313 Social Psychology - 3 credits 

30 credits  

27 credits  

Education Requirements  
EDUC 150 Introduction to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits 
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary School - 3 credits  
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits    
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits 
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  

Special Education Requirements 
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 220 Instructional/Assistive Technology - 3 credits 
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 281 High Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits 
SPED 282 Low Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits  
SPED 381 Secondary Transitions - 3 credits 
SPED 382 Autism Spectrum Disorders - 3 credits 
SPED 481 Intensive Reading, Writing, and Math Interventions - 3 credits  

Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

138 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Instructional Studies  

The  program,  leading  to  the  Bachelor  of  Arts  degree  with  a  major  in  Instructional  Studies,  has  been 
developed to meet the needs of those students who have a strong interest in the field of education and are 
seeking career opportunities that would not require formal state teaching certification. With the design of the 
program including 30 credits of general college electives, students have the ability to complete a minor and/or 

243 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transfer a maximum allowable number of credits for degree completion.  Students will be well prepared to 
enter  the  job  market  in  corporate  training,  work  in  non-profit  institutions,  work  with  children  in  various 
settings ranging from childcare centers to paraprofessionals in school districts, to academic program support at 
non-profit institutions of learning, just to name a few.  

The  program  includes  the  ability  to  complete  an  academic  minor.  Depending  on  the  interest  of  the 
student,  and  future  employment  scenarios,  the  minor  options  provide  a  rich  background  for  entering  the 
chosen field. The Bachelor of Arts with a major in Instructional Studies can be completed in an online modality 
as well as a traditional on campus experience. 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Instructional Studies  

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

45 credits  

18 credits  

27 credits  

Core Requirements  
EDUC 450 Advanced Seminar: Instructional Studies - Senior Capstone 

Department General Requirements  
History course - 3 credits 
Math course - 3 credits 
Political Science course - 3 credits 
Psychology course - 3 credits 
Sociology course - 3 credits 
One additional course in HIST, MATH, POLS, PSYC, SOC or SOCW- 3 credits 

Education Department Requirements  
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education in the 21st Century - 3 credits 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits 
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 281 High Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits 
SPED 282 Low Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits 

General Electives   
Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

30 credits  
120 credits  

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Dance Education 

244 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program Objectives  

5.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
6.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

7.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
8.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators.  

Core Requirements  
DANC 224 History of Dance I - Explore the World  
NSET 133 Kinesiology - Investigate Science 
DANC 225 History of Dance II - Interpret Creative Works 
EDUC 120 Building Family Partnerships OR 

42 credits  

EDUC 220 Family & Community Diversity - Understand People  

EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - Understand People 
EDUC 251 Arts and Music in Teaching - Appreciate & Apply the Arts 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - Discover Technology  
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

Department General Requirements  
Natural Sciences (3)  
MATH 100+ level - 3 credits 

3 credits  

Education Department Requirements 

36 credits  

EDUC 150 Introductions to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits  
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits 
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 317 Methods of Teaching Dance - 3 credits 
EDUC 401 Differentiated Reading for the Developing Child - 3 credits OR 
        EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary School - 3 credits  
EDUC 425 Student Teaching Practicum - 12 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits   
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits 
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 

39 credits 

Dance Requirements 
BAL 111 Classical Ballet I - 3 credits  
DANC 109 Elements of Production for Dancers I - 2 credits 
DANC 115 Music Fundamentals for Dancers - 2 credits 
DANC 153 Dancer Wellness - 1 credit 
DANCE 163 Somatic Preparation for Technique - 1 credit 
DANC 180 Dance Improvisation - 1 credit 
DANC 280 Dance Composition I - 2 credits   
DANC 281 Dance Composition II - 2 credits  
DANC 355 Dance Aesthetics and Criticism - 1 credit 
JAZ 111 Jazz I - 3 credits 

245 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MOD 111 Modern I - 3 credits 

Choose a Concentration (15 credits) 
Ballet  
BAL 121 Classical Ballet II - 3 credits 
BAL 211 Classical Ballet III - 3 credits 
BAL 221 Classical Ballet IV - 3 credits 
BAL 311 Classical Ballet V - 3 credits 
BAL 321 Classical Ballet VI - 3 credits 

Jazz  
JAZ 121 Jazz II - 3 credits 
JAZ 211 Jazz III - 3 credits 
JAZ 221 Jazz IV - 3 credits 
JAZ 311 Jazz V - 3 credits 
JAZ 321 Jazz VI - 3 credits 

Modern  
MOD 121 Modern II - 3 credits 
MOD 211 Modern III - 3 credits 
MOD 221 Modern IV - 3 credits 
MOD 311 Modern V - 3 credits 
MOD 321 Modern VI - 3 credits 

Choose 3 credits from the following areas: 
BAL 131 Pointe I - 1 credit 
BAL 141 Pointe II - 1 credit 
BAL 231 Pointe III - 1 credit 
BAL 171 Pas de Deux I - 1 credit 
BAL 181 Pas de Deux II - 1 credit 
BAL 271 Pas de Deux III - 1 credit 
BAL 291 Ballet Repertoire - 1 credit OR 

MOD 291 Modern Dance Repertory I - 1 credit  

DANC 106 Cultural Dance Forms I - 1 credit 
DANC 105 Tap Dance I - 1 credit 
DANC 107 Character Dance I - 1 credit 
DANC 236 Contemporary Partnering I - 1 credit 

Minimum credits for B.A. degree  

120 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

246 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Residency Programs 

The School of Education has developed on-the-job residency programs for paraprofessionals working in 
schools. These two unique, online, portfolio-based programs provide a pathway to earn a bachelor’s degree and 
teaching certification through Point Park University. These programs offer the preparation and certification 
necessary to earn a teaching degree and certification while working as a paraprofessional. 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in PreK-4th Residency Program 

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators. 

42 credits  

21 credits 

57 credits  

Core Requirements 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
EDUC 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

Education Requirements   
MATH Elective - 3 credits 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - 3 credits 
EDUC 150 Introductions to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - 3 credits 
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - 3 credits 
EDUC 252 Children's Literature - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements 
EDUC 120 Building Family Partnerships - 3 credits 
EDUC 210 Introduction to Teaching in the Residency Program - 3 credits 
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 302 Reading Methods I - 3 credits 
EDUC 303 Reading Methods II - 3 credits 
EDUC 305 Methods of Mathematics I - 3 credits 
EDUC 308 Teaching Social Studies - 3 credits 
EDUC 310 Teaching Science and Health- 3 credits 
EDUC 315 Methods of Mathematics II - 3 credits 
EDUC 330 Educational Theories and Practices - 3 credits 
EDUC 401 Differentiated Reading for the Developing Child - 3 credits 
EDUC 411 Integrating Curriculum and Instruction - 3 credits 
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits  
EDUC 434 Student Teaching I - 3 credits 
EDUC 435 Student Teaching II - 6 credits 
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  

247 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 

Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

120 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Bachelor of Arts Degree with a major in Special Education PreK-12 Residency Program 

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators. 

42 credits  

21 credits 

57 credits  

Core Requirements 
Required Courses in the Thematic Core for Education Majors 
SPED 432 Student Teaching Seminar - Senior Capstone 

Education Requirements   
MATH Elective - 3 credits 
EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century - 3 credits 
EDUC 150 Introductions to the Teaching Profession - 3 credits 
EDUC 220 Family and Community Diversity - 3 credits 
EDUC 222 Assessment and Adaptation - 3 credits  
EDUC 228 Educational Psychology - 3 credits 
EDUC 252 Children's Literature - 3 credits 

Department Major Requirements 
EDUC 120 Building Family Partnerships - 3 credits 
EDUC 210 Introduction to Teaching in the Residency Program - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
EDUC 302 Reading Methods I - 3 credits 
EDUC 305 Methods of Mathematics I - 3 credits 
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary School - 3 credits 
EDUC 401 Differentiated Reading for the Developing Child - 3 credits 
EDUC 422 Data Driven Instruction - 3 credits  
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  
SPED 220 Instructional/Assistive Technology and Universal Design - 3 credits 
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  

248 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPED 281 High Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits 
SPED 282 Low Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits  
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom - 3 credits 
SPED 381 Secondary Transitions- 3 credits  
SPED 481 Intensive Reading, Writing, and Math Interventions - 3 credits  
SPED 434 Student Teaching I - 3 credits 
SPED 435 Student Teaching II - 6 credits 

Minimum credits for B.A. degree 

120 credits  

Tests for Certification: 
Check PDE Test Requirements:  
https://www.pa.gov/agencies/education/programs-and-services/educators/certification/certification-
testing.html 

Certificate in Career and Technical Teaching in Practice (CTTP) Program 

The School of Education’s Career and Technical Teaching in Practice (CTTP) Certification Program is 

for students whose primary responsibility will be teaching occupational skills in state approved Career and 
Technical Education centers. Students will complete 18 credits of coursework aligned to the Pennsylvania 
Department of Education's career and technical competencies. Candidates who successfully complete the 
coursework will be eligible for the Career and Technical Instructional I Certification. Point Park University 
CTTP courses are designed to focus on the initial needs of the Career and Technical educator as a classroom 
teacher, thus enabling the practitioner to immediately apply the pedagogical knowledge gained in 
coursework, to the classroom environment. Consistent with best practices in learning, assessments 
throughout the program will be designed to apply knowledge and theory to practice. Students will “learn by 
doing” and assessments within each course will require students to document learnings through narrative 
analysis, videos, reflections, and other tasks applicable to the course content. 

The program is designed as a Cohort model, as students will benefit from continuous learning, 

applicable to their growth as an educator. In addition, developing relationships with other colleagues in their 
cohort will provide further peer support in their endeavor to become high quality Career and Technical 
classroom educators. 

Program Objectives  

1.  Utilize a variety of instructional strategies.  
2.  Develop instructional plans and set goals based on the content to be taught/learned, knowledge of 

assigned students, and the instructional process.  

3.  Establish and maintain purposeful and equitable classroom environments.  
4.  Demonstrate integrity, ethical behavior, and professional conduct as stated in the Pennsylvania Code 

of Professional Practice and Conduct for Educators. 

Program Requirements: 
EDUC 105 CTE Intro to Teaching - 3 credits 
EDUC 106 CTE Classroom Management - 3 credits 
EDUC 107 CTE Differentiated Instructional Practices - 3 credits 

249 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EDUC 108 CTE Assessment Strategies - 3 credits 
EDUC 109 CTE Instructional Planning - 3 credits 
EDUC 110 CTE Content Literacy - 3 credits 

Minors in the School of Education 

The Minors for the School of Education consist of a minimum of 18 credits. The following minors are 

available:  

Middle School English Minor (18 credits)  
EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary Schools - 3 credits  
EDUC 250 World Literature: Drama, Poetry, Epic - 3 credits  
EDUC 251 World Literature: Novels - 3 credits 
ENGL 302 Introduction to Linguistics OR  

ENGL 335 History of the English Language - 3 credits  

ENGL 262 American Literature Survey I OR  

ENGL 263 American Literature Survey II - 3 credits  

ENGL 338 Literary Criticism - 3 credits  

Middle School Mathematics Minor (18 credits) 
EDUC 415 Teaching in Secondary School - 3 credits  
MATH 150 Mathematical Problem Solving– 3 credits  
MATH 155 General Mathematics - 3 credits  
MATH 165 Basic Algebra - 3 credits  
MATH 175 Elementary Statistics - 3 credits  
MATH 180 College Algebra - 3 credits  

Middle School Social Studies Minor (18 credits) 
ECON 201 Principles of Economics/Macroeconomics OR  

ECON 202 Principles of Economics/Microeconomics - 3 credits  

HIST 203 History of the U.S. I OR  

HIST 204 History of the U.S. II - 3 credits  

HIST 378 U.S. History since World War I - 3 credits  
HIST 201 History of Western Civilization I - 3 credits  
HIST 202 Western Civilization since the Sixteenth Century - 3 credits  
POLS 102 American National Government - 3 credits  

Middle School Science Minor (18 credits) 
BIOL 111 Introduction to Contemporary Biological Concepts II - 3 credits  
BIOL 211 Human Biology - 3 credits  
CHEM 101 General Chemistry I - 3 credits  
NSET 110 Introduction to the Natural Sciences - 3 credits  
NSET 111 Introduction to the Life Sciences - 3 credits 
NSET 160 Environmental Science - 3 credits 

250 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Education Minor (18 credits) 
Eighteen credits in Education or Special Education - 18 credits  

Special Education Minor (18 credits) 
SPED 180 Special Education and Inclusive Practices - 3 credits  

Five Additional courses from the following:  
EDUC 250 Working with English Language Learners - 3 credits  
SPED 220 Instructional/Assistive Technology - 3 credits  
SPED 280 Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports - 3 credits  
SPED 281 High Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits  
SPED 282 Low Incidence Disabilities - 3 credits 
SPED 380 Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Classroom - 3 credits  
SPED 381 Secondary Transition Processes and Procedures - 3 credits  
SPED 481 Intensive Reading, Writing, and Math Interventions - 3 credits  

Graduate Studies  
For a graduate catalog or information, visit the website or please call Graduate Admissions Office at (412) 392-
3808. 

251 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 

COURSE NUMBERS 

The course-numbering system indicates the college level at which courses are normally taken. 

001-009 
010-099 
100-199 
200-299 
300-499 
500-599 
600-799 

NUMBERING SYSTEM GUIDE 

precollege course-no credit 
credit granted but not applicable to graduation 
primarily for first-year students 
primarily for second-year students 
primarily for upper division students 
graduate courses 
doctorate courses 

At the end of each description, course credits are listed.  Courses with variable hours and credits are 

so indicated. 

ACCT – ACCOUNTING 

ACCT 210   Introduction to Financial Accounting  

3 credits 

Introduction  to  and  application  of  financial  accounting  as  the  "language  of  business".  Concepts  related  to  the 
collection, analysis, evaluation, and reporting of financial information of business entities to enable stakeholder decision 
making related primarily to capital allocation. Prerequisite: MATH 180. 

ACCT 220  Management Accounting for Decision Makers 

3 credits 

Organizational  decision  making,  planning,  and  accountability  using  managerial  accounting  tools  and  techniques. 

Prerequisite: ACCT 210. 

ACCT 230   Accounting Information Systems 

3 credits 

An introduction to computerized accounting information systems. Financial data processing and reporting, including 
application of accounting concepts, principles and preparation of reports, using systems commonly used in actual practice. 
Prerequisite: ACCT 210. 

ACCT 310   Intermediate Financial Accounting I 

3 credits 

A  study  of  accounting  standards,  the  conceptual  framework  and  financial  reporting  with  a  focus  on  the  income 
statement, the balance sheet, the statement of cash flows, and a detailed examination of accounting concepts related to 
cash, receivables and inventories. Prerequisite: ACCT 210. 

ACCT 311   Intermediate Financial Accounting II 

3 credits 

A study of accounting standards, the conceptual framework and financial reporting with a focus on property, plant 
and equipment, intangible assets, depreciation, amortization, impairments, liabilities, and equity. Prerequisite: ACCT 310. 

ACCT 312  Intermediate Financial Accounting III                                                                

3 credits 

A  study  of  accounting  standards,  the  conceptual  framework  and  financial  reporting  with  a  focus  on  revenue 

recognition, income taxes, leases, pension, and post-retirement benefits. Prerequisite: ACCT 311. 

ACCT 320  Cost Accounting 

                                                                                                   3 credits 

Principles and procedures for determining unit cost of production, job order cost and standard process cost systems. 

Prerequisite: ACCT 210, ACCT 220, CMPS 214. 

ACCT 350  Federal Taxation I 

                                                                                                   3 credits 

Basic principles and procedures of Federal Taxation with an emphasis on individual taxpayers. Perquisites: ACCT 

210, or permission of instructor. 

ACCT 381   Accounting Internship I 
        Part-time  job  experience  approved  by  the  department  in  an  accounting  firm,  a  business  or  industry.  Method  of 

3 credits 

252 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
evaluation to be agreed upon by the departmental and job-site supervisors. May include periodic reports, a day-by-day journal 
and a final report. Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission. 

ACCT 382   Accounting Internship II 
       Part-time  job  experience  approved  by  the  department  in  an  accounting  firm,  a  business  or  industry.  Method  of 
evaluation to be agreed upon by the departmental and job-site supervisors. May include periodic reports, a day-by-day journal 
and a final report. Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission. 

3 credits 

ACCT 410   Advanced Accounting Theory 

3 credits 

Accounting  principles  as  they  relate  to  business  combinations  and  the  consolidation  process.  Advanced  complex 

financial accounting topics will be covered. Prerequisites: ACCT 312. 

ACCT 440  Auditing I 

                                                                                                   3 credits 

An introduction to the fundamentals of financial statement auditing. A study of the principles and practices used by 
public accountants in examining financial statements and supporting data with an emphasis on the basic auditing concepts 
such as risk, internal control, evidence, objectivity and important relationships among these concepts. Perquisites: ACCT 
312.  

ACCT 450  Federal Taxation II 

                                                                                         3 credits 

Basic  principles  and  procedures  of  Federal  Taxation  with  emphasis  on  business  entity  federal  income  taxpayers.  

Prerequisites: ACCT 350 or permission of instructor. 

ACCT 460  Nonprofit Accounting 

                                                                                      3 credits 

A  study of the  principles  of accounting  in  nonprofit  organizations,  including  donations,  restricted accounts,  fund 

balance and IRS requirements. Prerequisites: ACCT 210.  

ACCT 295, ACCT 395, ACCT 495  Selected Topics in Accounting I, II, III 

ACCT 296, ACCT 396, ACCT 496  Independent Study in Accounting I, II, III 

 Special Request    

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

AMGT – ARTS MANAGEMENT 

AMGT 216 Development for the Arts 

3 credits 

Examines the different aspects of development including the roles played by the board of directors and staff in raising 
funds for arts organizations. An overview of corporate, foundation and government grant-seeking. Individual donor drives 
and their relationship to audience-building. The components of, and differences between annual, multi-year, challenge and 
capital campaigns, and how general operating funds and project funds support arts organization activities. Students will 
visit and learn to use the Foundation Center at the Carnegie Library. Prerequisite: Junior/Senior Standing; Film and Video, 
Digital Arts and Cinema, Film and Video Production, and Photography Majors Only. 

ARBC – ARABIC 

ARBC 101  Elementary Arabic I 

3 credits 

Students will study the Arabic script and phonology of the five major dialectical areas as well as acquiring an overview 
of these geographical areas.  Emphasis will be placed on acquisition of the Arabic script, pronunciation, and learning simple 
dialogues. 

ARBC 102  Elementary Arabic II 

3 credits 

Students will study the grammatical case system for the singular, dual and plural.  They will also begin the trilateral 
and quadrilateral radical system.  Emphasis will be placed on improving pronunciation and on learning simple dialogues.  
Prerequisite: ARBC 101. 

253 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ARBC 201  Intermediate Arabic I 

3 credits 

Students will increase their proficiency in reading, translation, and writing in the ruq’a script.  Emphasis will be placed 

on situational dialogues and on grammatical analysis.  Prerequisite: ARBC 102. 

ARBC 202  Intermediate Arabic II 

3 credits 

Students will increase their proficiency in pronunciation and the facility in the use of the Arabic script.  Emphasis will 
be placed on speaking, reading, and writing skills, using simple short texts, situational dialogues, and grammatical analysis.  
Pre-requisite: ARBC 201. 

ART – FINE ARTS 

ART 100    Introduction to the Visual Arts 

3 credits 

An introduction to the visual arts from both an analytical and historical perspective. Representational and abstract 
organizations are discussed. The historical perspective is presented in a brief chronological survey of painting, sculpture, 
and architecture in Western art from ancient Greece and Rome to the present day. Students will have experiences both 
inside and outside the classroom, including lectures, art demonstrations, hands-on activities, and possible conversations 
with specialists when available.  

ART 210    Introduction to Architecture 

3 credits 

Survey of the architecture of the Ancient, Medieval, Renaissance, Baroque and Modern periods. All major styles are 
covered. Architecture is presented within the context of determinants such as geographical, cultural and historical factors. 
Terms, significant architects and representative works are highlighted. Prerequisite: ART 100. 

ART 212    Graphic Design 

3 credits 

A studio course with some lecture; no art background necessary. Relationship of basic design principles to graphic art 
problems in projects involving such concepts as the use of positive and negative space, unity, balance and emphasis. Projects 
involve design with typography, body copy, photography, illustration and graphic elements in mass-media communication.  

ART 213  

Introduction to Drawing 

3 credits 

An introductory studio course dealing with basic drawing issues and problems. Fundamental exercises geared to the 
novice include contour, gesture, structural, and value studies, as well as an emphasis on figure drawing with the live model. 

ART 214    Concepts in Rendering 

3 credits 

The concepts in rendering as related to theatre design projects with particular emphasis on creative techniques that 
enlarge artistic vision. Projects include collage, multi-media, basic sketching for scenic design and color values. Open to 
Technical Theatre/Design majors with permission. Other University majors may ask permission to enroll.  

ART 215    Finding Your Vision, Finding Your Voice                                                       
       This course explores the nature of inspiration across artistic disciplines. We will examine poets, painters, filmmakers, 
choreographers, and writers both in terms of their creative output and their writings on the nature of artistic creativity, 
imagination, and inspiration. Then, using each of our creative thinkers as nature of artistic creativity, imagination, and 
inspiration.  Then,  using  each  of  our  creative  thinkers  as  touchstones,  we  will  look  at  ourselves  as  artists  and  ask  the 
questions that permeate all disciplines of COPA: Why do we create? How do we create? Where do we find our inspiration 
and then translate it into artistic expression?  

3 credits 

ART 301    Ancient Art 

3 credits 

Survey of the art and architecture of ancient Egypt, Greece, Rome and the Islamic world.  Emphasis on the cultural 
and historical developments which made possible the flourishing of creativity in the arts of these civilizations. Includes a 
variety of media, but stresses architectural developments, especially those of Greece and Rome.  Prerequisite:  ART 100. 

ART 302    Medieval Art 

3 credits 

Survey of the art and architecture of the Medieval period in Europe from the fourth through the fourteenth century. 
All major periods and styles covered. Architecture is stressed, but emphasis is also placed on painting, sculpture, mosaics, 
ivory carving, manuscript illumination and stained glass. Prerequisite: ART 100. 

254 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ART 304    Renaissance and Baroque Art 

3 credits 

Survey of the art and architecture of Italy and Northern Europe from the end of the Middle Ages, or the late Gothic 

period, to about 1775. Major styles of the Renaissance and Baroque periods are covered. Prerequisite: ART 100. 

ART 305    Modern Art 

3 credits 

Survey of the painting, sculpture and architecture of Europe and America from about 1775 to the present. Dominant 
movements and themes of the Modern period are presented. The twentieth century is discussed with regard to new attitudes 
toward the nature, functions and materials of art and architecture. Prerequisite: ART 100.  

ART 306    American Art 

3 credits 

Survey  of  American  painting,  sculpture  and  architecture  from  the  seventeenth  century  Colonial  period  to  1900, 
presented in relation to a changing cultural, social and philosophical background. Architecture in a variety of styles and 
developments. Emphasizes nineteenth as the first great indigenous style in American art. Prerequisite: ART 100.  

ART 313    Advanced Drawing 

3 credits 

An  advanced  studio  course  designed  to  explore  and  expand  upon  previously  learned  skills  such  as  gesture,  value 
studies,  and  the  figure.  Slide  lectures,  critiques,  field  trips,  as  well  as  specific  advanced  exercises  designed  to  heighten 
investigation in seeing. Prerequisite:  ART 213.  

ART 320    Figure Drawing 

3 credits 

This  course  introduces  the  fundamental  principles  of  drawing  the  human  form.    Students  study  systems  of 
measurement, learn the importance of gesture as a framework for proportion and movement and model structure with 
light and tone.  Human muscular and skeletal anatomy is studied in order to create convincing drawing from observation 
and invention.   

ART  194, ART  294        Special Topics                                                               

ART 295, ART 395, ART 495  Special Topics in Fine Arts I, II, III 

ART 296, ART 396, ART 496 Independent Study in Fine Arts I, II, III 

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

AVT – AVIATION MANAGEMENT 

AVT 201   Unmanned Aircraft Systems                                                                       

2 credits 

This  course  is  designed  to  prepare  students  for  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  Part  107  Remote  Pilot 
Certification exam. Students will gain a comprehensive understanding of the regulations, airspace, weather, and operations 
required  for  commercial  drove  operations  under  Part  107.  The  course  will  cover  topics  such  as  aeronautical  decision 
making,  crew  resource  management,  airport  operations,  radio  communication  procedures,  and  emergency  operations. 
Upon  successful  completion  of  the  course,  students  will  be  prepared  to  take  the  FAA  Part 107  exam  and  obtain their 
Remote Pilot Certificate. Note: Participant must be at least 16 years of age at the time they sit for the exam. 

AVT 202   Unmanned Aircraft Systems Flight Lab 

                                                             1 credit 

The UAS Flight Lab is designed to provide students with hands-on experience and practical training in the operation 
of Unmanned Aircraft Systems under the regulations outlined in Part 107 of the Federal Aviation Regulations. This course 
builds upon the theoretical knowledge gained in AVT 201, focusing on the application of regulations and safety procedures 
in real world UAS operations. 

AVT 301   Aviation Leadership 

3 credits 

Aviation Leadership is designed to immerse the student into the role, activities, and responsibilities essential for the 
emerging  aviation  leader,  and  is  foundational  to  preparation  for  a  career  in  the  aviation  industry  or  aviation  related 
environments. 

AVT 302   Aviation Security & Policy 

3 credits 

This course examines the principles, practices, and policies related to aviation security within the context of global 
aviation systems. Topics include threat assessment, risk management, security regulations, international agreements, and 
the role of government agencies and industry stakeholders in ensuring aviation security. Students will explore case studies 

255 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and current issues in aviation security to understand the complexities and challenges faced by the industry. 

AVT 303   Aviation Operations and Management 

                                                              3 credits 

This course provides an overview of aviation operations and management principles within the context of the global 
aviation industry. Students will examine the complexities of aviation operations, including scheduling, fleet management, 
ground  operations,  and  customer  service.  Emphasis  will  be  placed  on  the  integration  of  operational  efficiency,  safety 
protocols, and customer satisfaction within the aviation management framework. 

AVT 304   Aviation Law 

                                                                                                        3 credits 

Aviation Law explores the historical development, federal and state regulatory functions, and rights and liabilities of 
various facets within the aviation industry. This course analyzes historical aviation law cases in order to understand how 
past actions impact current aviation policies and enforcements. 

AVT 306   Corporate and Business Aviation 

                                                                        3 credits 

This course provides an examination of corporate and business aviation operations, focusing on the unique challenges 
and  considerations  of  this  sector  within  the  broader  aviation  industry.  Topics  include  corporate  flight  department 
management, aircraft acquisition and financing, regulatory compliance, safety management systems, and the integration of 
business aviation with corporate strategies. 

AVT 350   Aviation Internship 

                                                                                             3 credits 

The Internship offers students the opportunity to gain practical experience in various aspects of the aviation industry. 
Through  placements  with  flight  schools,  airports,  aviation  companies,  or  regulatory  agencies,  students  will  apply  their 
classroom knowledge to real world aviation operations. 

AVT 401   Aviation Research Capstone 

                                                                              3 credits 

This course provides an introduction to research methods and techniques specific to the field of aviation. Students 
will learn how to formulate research questions, develop hypotheses, design research studies, collect and analyze data, and 
interpret research findings. Emphasis will be placed on applying research methods to aviation related topics, such as safety, 
security, operations, management, and technology. 

BAL – BALLET 

BAL 101 

Supplemental Classical Ballet I – B.A., Non-Concentration 

1-2 credits                             

A study of classical ballet technique and theory with an emphasis on proper placement and correct execution. Class 

placement is determined by student potential and previous training. 

BAL 102 

Supplemental Classical Ballet II – B.A., Non-Concentration 

1-2 credits                            

Continued study of classical ballet technique and theory with an emphasis on proper placement and correct execution 

at novice to intermediate level. 

BAL 111  Classical Ballet I 
         A study of classical ballet technique and theory focusing on: Anatomical alignment, neutral spinal and pelvic 
alignments, proper knowledge and execution of ballet vocabulary. This course is taught at the low intermediate 1 level.   
Prerequisite: Freshman Dance Major, Audition 

3 credits                            

BAL 121  Classical Ballet II 
         Continued study of classical ballet technique and theory from BAL 111, focusing on: moving through space 
utilizing body directions, epaulement, coordination of port de bras, and distribution of physical weight. This course is 
taught at the low intermediate 2 level. Prerequisite: BAL 111. 

3 credits                            

BAL 131  Pointe I 

1 credit                           

An intermediate level study of pointe technique focusing on articulation of the foot, placing the weight properly over 
the foot and shoe, and pulling up through the legs and upper body. Dancers are expected to have a working knowledge of 
basic concepts such as ‘down to go up’ and using the floor’s resistance in pointing, brushing, and relevé. Many exercises 
will work on strengthening the foot, ankle, and back for pointe. Prerequisite: Audition. 

256 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAL 141  Pointe II 

1 credit                             

Continued study of pointe technique focusing on transitions, muscular strength, turns, and balance. Emphasis will 
be placed on relevés on one foot and two feet, pirouettes en dehors and en dedans from 4th and 5th, and repetitive turns 
such as chainés tours déboulé, fouettes, and piqué en tournant. Additional exercises will work on strengthening the foot 
and ankle for hops sur les pointe. Prerequisite: BAL 131. 

BAL 151  Classical Allegro and Turning Techniques I 

1 credit                             

This course is the first in a series of courses designed to address the specific technical requirements needed to perform 
classical ballet variations historically and traditionally performed by men. This course is open to all students. Prerequisite: 
Audition. 

BAL 161  Classical Allegro and Turning Techniques II 

1 credit                             

A continuation of BAL 151 with an emphasis on increasing technical accomplishment (multiple pirouettes, double 

tour en l’air, and entrechat six) when performing movement sequences. Prerequisite: BAL: 151. 

BAL 171  Classical Ballet Partnering I 

1 credit                          

This is the first in a series of courses introducing the techniques required to perform classical ballet partnering. Weight 
sharing, supported single pirouettes, promenades, and stationary lifts will be included. This course is taught at the beginning 
level. Prerequisite: Audition. 

BAL 181  Classical Ballet Partnering II 

1 credit                         

A continuation of BAL 171 taught at the intermediate level with an emphasis on connecting movement phrases while 

incorporating complex promenades, multiple pirouettes, and traveling lifts. Prerequisite: BAL 171. 

BAL 201 

Supplemental Ballet I 

1-2 credits 

This course is the first of six sequential courses that will enhance the required courses from modern and jazz dance 
concentration  students.  Students  will  learn  the  necessary  movement  skills  to  facilitate  the  execution  of  classical  ballet 
movement vocabulary. Prerequisite: BAL 121 or Instructor Placement 

BAL 202 

Supplemental Ballet II 

1-2 credits 

This  is  the  second  of  six  sequential  courses  that  will  enhance  the  required  courses  for  modern  and  jazz  dance 
concentration students. This course combines ballet vocabulary in movement phrases, building cardiovascular stamina, and 
physical strength.  Prerequisite: BAL 201 

BAL 211  Classical Ballet III 
       A continued study of ballet technique and theory incorporating the concepts from BAL 121, emphasizing musical 
phrasing  in  adagio,  pirouettes,  petite  allegro,  and  grand  allegro.  This  course  is  taught  at  the  intermediate  1  level.  
Prerequisite: BAL 121 

3 credits                             

BAL 221  Classical Ballet IV 
      A  continuation  study  of  classic  ballet  technique  and  theory  incorporating  the concepts  from  BAL  211  focusing  on 
linking of turning vocabulary on one leg and turning en l'air. This course is taught at the intermediate 2 level. Prerequisite: 
BAL 211. 

3 credits                             

BAL 231  Pointe III 

1 credit  

This  course  explores  the  use  of  neo-classical  pointe  work  within  the  context  of  contemporary  movement.  Special 

emphasis will be given to transitions and foot articulation from demi pointe to full pointe. Prerequisite: BAL 141. 

BAL 241  Pointe IV 

1 credit                             

An advanced level course with particular emphasis placed on increasing technical virtuosity through the study and 

execution of variations from the classical and neo classical canon. Prerequisite: BAL 231. 

BAL 251  Classical Allegro and Turning Techniques III 

1 credit                             

A continuation of BAL 161 with emphasis on technical consistency and the introduction of grand allegro (double 
saut de basque, double assemblé en tournant, revoltade, and various sequences en manège). Variations taught at the high 
intermediate level will be introduced. Prerequisite: BAL 161. 

BAL 261  Classical Allegro and Turning Techniques IV 

1 credit                             

A  continuation  of  BAL  251 with  an  emphasis  on  the  consistency  of  execution  of  all technical  components  while 

performing classical variations taught at the advanced level. Prerequisite: BAL 251. 

257 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BAL 271  Classical Ballet Partnering III 

1 credit                             

A continuation of BAL 181 taught at the advanced level with an emphasis on learning and executing dances from the 

classical ballet canon. Prerequisite BAL: 181. 

BAL 281  Pas de Deux IV 

1 credit                             

A continuation of BAL 271 with emphasis on techniques of partnering and studies of selected classical pas de deux.  

Prerequisite: BAL 271. 

BAL 291  Ballet Repertoire 

1 credit                             

This course is an introduction to classical, neoclassical, and contemporary ballet repertoire focusing on the technical, 
stylistic, musical, and artistic standards of each work. Classes will culminate in an informal performance at semester end. 
Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. 

BAL 297  Contemporary Ballet 

2 credits                             

This  course  connects  the  technique  of  contemporary  movement  with  classical  ballet  through  sound  somatic  and 
relevant aesthetic principles. Students will focus on dynamic presentation of phrasework at barre and in center practice. 
Dancers  will  be  instructed  on  how  to  embody  a  dynamic  quality  of  movement,  enhanced  expressive  range,  and  clear 
technique. Additional instruction will build strength, fluidity, and range of motion. 

BAL 301 

Supplemental Ballet III 

1-2 credits 

This is the third of six sequential courses that will enhance the required courses for modern and jazz concentration 
students. Students will be challenged in their ability to replicate more complex movement phrases and musically articulate 
these phrases. Prerequisite: BAL 202, 2 credits. 

BAL 302 

Supplemental Ballet IV 

1-2 credits 

This  is  the  fourth  in  six  sequential  courses  that  will  enhance  the  required  courses  for  the  modern  and  jazz 
concentration  students.  Students  will  be  challenged  with  the  following:  complex  jumping  sequences,  elevation  when 
jumping and multiple turning combinations. Prerequisite: BAL 301 

BAL 311  Classical Ballet V 
        A continued study of classical ballet technique and theory incorporating the concepts from BAL 221 focusing on 
sautes. This course is taught at the high intermediate 1 level. Prerequisite: BAL 221. 

3 credits                             

BAL 321  Classical Ballet VI 
       Continued study of classical ballet technique and theory incorporating the concepts from BAL 311 focusing on battue. 
This course is taught at the high intermediate level 2.   Prerequisite: BAL 311. 

3 credits                             

BAL 401 

Supplemental Ballet V 

1-2 credits 

This is the fifth of six sequential courses that will enhance the required courses for modern and jazz concentration 

students. Students will be challenged with performing sustained adagios and petite allegros that incorporate pirouettes. 
Prerequisite: BAL 302 

BAL 402 

Supplemental Ballet VI 

1-2 credits 

This is the sixth of six sequential courses that will enhance the required courses for modern and jazz concentration 
students. Students will be challenged with their abilities to show their versatility in a wide variety of stylized movement skills 
and self-critique these videos in written format. Prerequisite: BAL 401. 

BAL 411  Classical Ballet VII 
        Continued study of classical ballet technique and theory incorporating the concepts from BAL 321 and focusing on 
individual artistry. This course is taught at the advanced level 1.   Prerequisite: BAL 321. 

3 credits                             

BAL 421  Classical Ballet VIII 
       A continued study of classical ballet technique and theory incorporating the concepts from BAL 411. This course is 
taught at the advanced level 2 and will focus on consistent and proficient technique, and a wide variety of styles appropriate 
for pre-professional.  Prerequisite: BAL 411 

3 credits                             

258 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIOL – BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES 

BIOL 101  General Biology I 

3 credits 

An introduction to the cell as the basic unit of life, its structures, functions and the extension of these aspects to all 

living organisms. Laboratory section:  BIOL 103. 

BIOL 102  General Biology II 

3 credits 

The  development  and  maintenance  of  life  including  the  relationship  of  organisms  to  each  other  and  to  their 

environment; the process and results of evolution. Laboratory section:  BIOL 104. 

BIOL 103  General Biology Laboratory I 

1 credit 

Development of basic laboratory skills illustrating important biological principles. Prerequisite or co-requisite:  BIOL 

101.  

BIOL 104  General Biology Laboratory II 

1 credit 

Development of basic laboratory skills illustrating important biological principles. Prerequisite or co-requisite:  BIOL 

102.  

BIOL 205  Botany 

4 credits 

A brief summary of the plant kingdom with emphasis on the structure and function of important members and their 

ecologic and economic role in ecosystems. This includes a 1 credit lab. Prerequisites: BIOL 101, BIOL 102.  

BIOL 206  Zoology 

4 credits 

The taxonomy of the protozoa and metazoa as well as the morphology and physiology of the major homeostatic organ 
systems  are  studied  from  a  comparative  and  evolutionary  point  of  view.  The  laboratory  consists  of  a  study  of  selected 
organisms which best demonstrate the theory and principles of homeostasis. This includes  a 1 credit lab.  Prerequisites: 
BIOL 101, BIOL 102. 

BIOL 210  Biological Evolution 

3 credits 

The  study  of  the  Theory  of  Biological  Evolution.  An  historical  approach  leading  to  Darwin’s  Theory  of  Natural 
Selection;  understanding  Darwin’s  Theory  and  its  implications  for  science  and  society;  a  study  of  the  evidences  for 
demonstrating the validity of biological evolution; and some of the new frontiers of scientific research which validates the 
classical evolutionary argument. Prerequisites: BIOL 102 or NSET 111. 

BIOL 216  Microbiology 
       Microorganisms with special reference to bacteria; the basic concepts and laboratory techniques. Protozoa, algae, fungi, 
viruses and rickettsia are included. Prerequisites: BIOL 101; CHEM 101. 

4 credits 

BIOL 222  Introduction to Genetics   

4 credits 

The principles of hereditary transmission, expression and interaction in individuals and populations are studied. The 
development of procedures and techniques used in the study of genetics, including plant, animal and protista life cycles; 
segregation analysis, cytogenetic techniques, mutagenesis and biochemical pathway analysis are covered. Prerequisites or co-
requisites: BIOL 102; MATH 175. 

BIOL 225    Anatomy and Physiology I 

4 credits 

Part one of a two-semester course in the structure and function of the systems of the human body. The chemical 
composition and structure of the cells that make up the tissues and organs of the integumentary, skeletal, nervous and 
muscular systems. Emphasis on normal and abnormal functioning of these systems in regard to maintaining homeostasis. 
Prerequisites:  BIOL 101/103. 

BIOL 226  Anatomy and Physiology II  

4 credits 

Part two of a two-semester course in the structure and function of the systems of the human body. The hormonal, 
respiratory, circulatory, digestive, excretory and reproductive systems. Emphasis on normal and abnormal functioning of 
these systems and the systems covered in Anatomy and Physiology I in regard to maintaining homeostasis. Prerequisite:  
BIOL 225. 

BIOL 231  Economic Botany 

3 credits 

A study of the history, characteristics and origin of plants used in industry and agriculture as well as future use of 

plants in the production of energy, food and materials. Prerequisite:  Any 100-level Biology course. 

259 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIOL 235  Introduction to Ecology 

3 credits 

A study of the principles which govern the interrelationships between the biosphere, atmosphere, hydrosphere and 
lithosphere components of a system of ecosystems, i.e., the ecosphere.  Ethical concerns will be discussed throughout the 
course.  Prerequisites:  BIOL 102, CHEM 102, NSET 111. 

BIOL 243  Public Health 

3 credits 

Introduction to selected topics in immunology and epidemiology and their applications to public health. Prerequisite:  

Any 100-level Biology course. 

BIOL 254  Elements of Human Nutrition 

3 credits 

Coverage of the carbohydrates, lipids and proteins as they relate to the composition of food material. Their role in 
metabolism along with the vitamins and micronutrients necessary for a balanced dietary regime. The digestive system and 
related accessory organs with respect to digestion and absorption.  

BIOL 300  Receptors, Signaling Pathways and Cellular Control Mechanisms 

3 credits 

A study of the major neurocrine, endocrine and cellular receptors, the signaling pathways through which they interact, 

and their importance. Prerequisite: BIOL 211. 

BIOL  310  Bioinformatics 

3 credits 

An introduction to the new technologies used in modern biological research including: bioinformatics, combinatorial 
chemistry,  high  throughput  screening,  transgenics,  nanotechnology,  machine  vision,  in  silico-biology,  etc.  Prerequisite: 
Junior Standing. 

BIOL 320  Biochemistry  

3 credits 

This  course  addresses  the  aspects  of  enzyme  kinetics  that  govern  cellular  reactions.    Topics  also  include  protein 
structure and function, generation of metabolic energy, biosynthesis of macromolecules, processing of information, and 
membrane  transport.    The  information  is  then  integrated  in  terms  of  overall  metabolism  and  mutations  that  result  in 
metabolic diseases.  Dual listed as CHEM 320.  Prerequisite:  CHEM 221. 

BIOL 324  Human Genetics 

3 credits 

The general  principles of segregation, modes of inheritance, cytogenetics and population genetics as they apply to 
normal and pathological conditions in humans. The principles of genetic engineering including recombination, cloning 
and artificial insemination with special reference to the ethical, physical, social and legal implications. Pedigree construction 
and analysis are an integral part of the course. Prerequisites:  BIOL 101, BIOL 102 or BIOL 111. 

BIOL 334  Occupational Safety and Health 

3 credits 

An introductory course dealing with the recognition, evaluation and control of occupational health hazards. Study of 
the work place, including safety and health standards, using the principles of biology, chemistry, physics, engineering and 
law. Prerequisite:  Junior standing. 

BIOL 341  Environmental Health 

3 credits 

A study of the effects of the environment on health and the prevention of resulting diseases and disability. Includes 
air pollution, water pollution, problems of solid waste disposal, toxic hazards, food protection, housing, insect vectors and 
rodents, noise and accidents. Prerequisite:  Junior standing. 

BIOL 350  Molecular/Cellular Biology 

4 credits 

A survey of basic biochemistry including biomolecules; proteins, enzymes, carbohydrates, lipids; and bioenergetics and 
metabolism.  This course contains a module in basic molecular biology includes gene regulation, transcription, translation 
and replication.  Laboratory activities including simulations are integrated into the course. Prerequisites: CHEM 222; BIOL 
222. 

BIOL 365  Developmental Biology 

3 credits 

This course describes the development patterns of model organisms and applies these principles to the study of human 
disease.  Topics include differentiation, morphogenesis, regeneration growth and tissue repair, and genetic and epigenetic 
control of development processes.  Laboratory activities that demonstrate these principles are integrated into the course.  
Prerequisites:  BIOL 101, BIOL 102, BIOL 222. 

260 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIOL 410    Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy 

3 credits 

This course emphasizes the adaptations of vertebrate morphology to the environmental conditions faced by vertebrates 
and their chordate ancestors in the remarkable range of habitats and conditions under which they occur.  Structure-function 
relationships of the organs/organ systems, and the range of structural and evolutionary modifications of organ systems seen 
in different vertebrate classes will be covered.  Also examined are the evolutionary history and phylogenetic relationships 
of the major vertebrate groups and vertebrate development.  Prerequisite:  BIOL 102/104. 

BIOL 420    Immunology 

3 credits 

This course covers cellular and acellular aspects of innate and specific immunity.  Hematopoesis, molecular aspects of 
cellular  development,  maturation,  activation  and  function  are  covered.    Also  discussed  are  the  molecular  aspects  of 
recognition.  Particular attention will focus on T-cell-mediated and humoral responses, and acquisition and interactions 
with normal flora.  Pre/Co-requisites:  BIOL 216, BIOL 350. 

BIOL 443   Applications in Environmental Science 

3 credits 

The  course  will  cover  issues  involved  in  protecting  the  environment  that  may  include  degradation,  conservation, 
recycling,  and  replenishment  that  are  central  to  the  work  of  environmental  scientists.  Students  will  be  introduced  to 
scientific equipment utilized in the field of environmental science and are required to complete a research assignment for 
their final project. Prerequisite: Junior standing. 

BIOL 445  Advances in Environmental Health 

3 credits 

Includes  a  survey  of  recent  research  in  the  area.  Guest  lecturers  discuss  current  problems  and  possible  solutions. 

Prerequisite:  BIOL 341. 

BIOL 447    Environmental Science Seminar 

 3 credits 

A  required  course  for  all  seniors  in  the  Environmental  Science  concentration  that  addresses  major  topics  in 
environmental science. Formal presentation by faculty, students and invited speakers as well as scientific journal readings 
will promote discussion from multi-disciplinary perspectives. Prerequisite: Senior standing.  

BIOL 448  Radiation Health and Protection 

3 credits 

A  survey  of  radiation  health  including  the  origin,  nature  and  interactions  of  ionizing  radiation,  and  nonionizing 
reduction; the biological effects of radiation; assessment of hazards; radiation protection methods and current problems 
and controversies surrounding the field. Prerequisite: CHEM 102. 

BIOL 449   Biology Seminar 

3 credits 

This communication-intensive course is a capstone experience for Biological Science Majors.  The course will focus 
on  designing  research  projects,  writing  for  the  sciences,  presentations  and  discussions.    Formal  presentation  by  invited 
speakers as well as  scientific journal readings will promote discussion from multidisciplinary perspectives.  Prerequisite:  
Junior/Senior Standing 

BIOL 450   Virology 

3 credits 

The  major  virus  families  are  discussed  with  respect  to  classification,  viral  genome,  structure,  pathogenesis, 
epidemiology and control.  The course focuses primarily on animal viruses but also covers bacteriophage, plant viruses and 
unconventional  agents  such  as  prions.    Basic  aspects  such  as  life  cycle,  replication,  targeted  drug  development  and 
applications in biotechnology will be discussed.  Pre/Corequisites:  BIOL 216, BIOL 350. 

BIOL 451  Drug Discovery and Development 

3 credits 

A  study  of  how  modern  human  and  animal  pharmaceuticals  and  agrochemicals  are  discovered,  patent  protected, 

developed, approved, marketed and sold in the US and around the world. Prerequisite: Senior Standing. 

BIOL 456   Advances in Nutrition 

         3 credits 

Recent  findings  on  the  methods  and  regimes  to  nourish  infants,  adolescents  and  the  geriatric  population.  

Controversial and classical methods are evaluated and analyzed.  Pre/Corequisite: BIOL 254.   

BIOL 295, BIOL 395, BIOL 495 Special Topics in the Biological Sciences I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

BIOL 296, BIOL 396, BIOL 496 Independent Study in the Biological Sciences I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

BIOL 499  Honors Internship in Biology 

1-6 credits 

Available  to  qualified  students  as  a  practicum  within  the  University  or  in  conjunction  with  an  external  agency. 

261 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Requires regular progress reports and a final paper. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: Consent of an instructor to 
act as a sponsor, acceptance by an agency if applicable, approval of the department chair, an overall G.P.A. of 3.30 and a 
departmental G.P.A. of 3.50. 

BMGT – BUSINESS MANAGEMENT 

BMGT 101 Introduction to Business                                                                                    
       This  course  is  an  introductory  overview  of  the  organization,  functions,  and  activities  of  business  in  contemporary 
society. Emphasis is placed on the terminology necessary to understanding business principles and practices. This course 
also includes an exploration of business environments, human resources, management, marketing management, finance, 
law, management information tools, and global perspectives. 

3 credits 

BMGT 201 Business Law I 

3 credits 

An introduction to the law in general and a survey of the law as it relates to business transactions including the law of 
contracts, agency and employment, personal property, intellectual property, real property, wills, descendants' estates, trusts 
and international law. 

BMGT 202 Business Law II                                                                                                       

3 credits 

A survey of the law as it relates to business transactions including the law of sales, the Uniform Commercial Code, 
consumer  law,  commercial  papers,  partnerships,  corporations,  antitrust,  labor,  environmental,  secured  transactions, 
bankruptcy, insurance and administrative law. Prerequisite:  BMGT 201. 

BMGT 208  Principles of Management 

3 credits 

Emphasis  on  the  major  theories  and  functions  of  management.  Students  develop  an  understanding  of  why 

management is needed in all organizations and what constitutes good management. Prerequisite:  

learn  the  basic 

BMGT 210  Digital Marketing 
        The internet and related technology skills are required by most business today – particularly in the realm of marketing.  
You’ll 
including  advertising,  search  engine 
the  online  marketing  ecosystem 
optimization/management,  analytics,  content  development/deployment  and  social  media.    This  is  a  hybrid  course, 
combining online learning with in-person implementation of learning with real clients during our class time.  Dual Listed 
with SAEM 210. Prerequisites: SAEM 202 or MKTS 205. 

language  of 

3 credits 

BMGT 221  Business Communications and Research 

3 credits 

The  objectives,  methods  and  forms  of  business  communications;  business  research  and  the  classification  and 

presentation of findings. Prerequisites: ENGL 101. 

BMGT 231  Introduction to the Hospitality Industry/Profession 
     This course uses the history of the hospitality industry to introduce students to the scope of businesses and activities, 
and current and emerging trends. 

3 credits  

BMGT 234  Ethical Leadership 

3 credits 

A philosophical investigation of the main concepts and theories of ethics, with applications to fundamental moral 
questions as they arise in different areas of business. The following issues may be used as illustrations: affirmative action, 
investment in unethical companies or countries, product safety, whistle blowing and advertising. Prerequisite: None. 

BMGT 241  Sales/Revenue and Marketing Planning in the Hospitality Industry                
         This course covers the various revenue centers or activities with the hospitality industry and how marketing planning 
is  used  to  determine  the  appropriate  mix.  Specialty  or  niche  marketing  strategies  will  be  examined,  along  with  other 
strategies for establishing competitive advantage, by employing Strategic Planning. Prerequisite: BMGT 231. 

3 credits 

BMGT 271 The Money Thing: Life and Finances During and After College 

3 credits 

Life is coming and so are its financial responsibilities.  Now is the time to become more financially literate. This course 
will  provide  students  an  engaging  and  approachable  framework  for  developing  greater  financial  literary  and  creating 
financial  plans  as  students  move  out  of  their  college  experience  and  into  the  real-world.    Topics  such  as  student  loan 
consolidation, balancing consumer needs and savings, creating financial budgets and plans, maintaining a healthy credit 
standing, and developing long-term financial horizons will be few of the areas covered through the use of readily available 

262 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PC and mobile applications.  Prerequisites:  Sophomore standing or above. 

BMGT 275  Applied Leadership & Management Strategies 

3 credits 

This course provides a practical exploration of leadership and management strategies that drive organizational success. 
Students will analyze  and  apply  best  practices  for  directing and  contributing  to  initiatives  and  processes  within  various 
organizational  settings.  Through  case  studies,  simulations,  and  hands-on  projects,  students  will  develop  a  best  practice 
mindset, enhancing their ability to lead teams, implement strategic initiatives, and foster continuous improvement. Key 
topics include decision-making, change management, performance optimization, and aligning leadership approaches with 
organizational goals. Prerequisites: ENG 101 

BMGT 280  Business Career Preparation 

1 credit 

This  class  will  prepare  students  for  entry  into  the  professional  world  by  developing  foundational  skills  in 
communicating with potential employers, interviewing, and building their online brand utilizing resumes, cover letters, 
social media, and e-portfolios. Prerequisites: BMGT 101 or SAEM 101. Course substitutions: SAEM 250. 

BMGT 300  Disney Leadership Seminar 

 3 credits 

The Disney Leadership Seminar will take you on an immersive journey into one of the most globally recognized brands, 
Walt Disney World. The course will pull back the curtain and illuminate the People, Culture, and Operational elements 
of how Disney became who they are and how they continue to evolve. All majors are welcomed as our team of faculty 
customize course content to align with students professional visions. The course is an 8-week intensive experience with 1-
week spent in Orlando Florida participating in Disney Institute classes, meeting executives, and undertaking research in 
each of the four theme parks.  

BMGT 303  International Business 

 3 credits 

An  overview  of  business  practices  in  the  international  arena  which  acquaints  students  with  the  complexities  of 
international business. Analysis of such topics as global interdependencies, the working of multinational enterprises and 
other concerns reflecting the variety of socio-economic environments in which transnational institutions function.  

BMGT 312 Business Negotiating 
        General research, analysis, and consideration of concepts in human behavior, conflict resolution, and negotiation. 
Also includes various approaches to negotiating in business. Prerequisite: Junior or Senior Standing. 

3 credits 

BMGT 315  Financial Reporting and Control 

3 credits 

Financial Reporting is a course in the non-technical  application of  the principles of accounting, with emphasis on 
the use and interpretation of financial reports, managerial planning and control. The course is designed to  impart a basic 
knowledge of the uses and applications of accounting . It is designed for the user of accounting information rather than 
the preparer.  Students in the HR program must retain a copy of the completed work for submission in their portfolio in 
BMGT 418.  Prerequisites:  ACCT 101, 102. 

BMGT 326  Investment Management 

3 credits 

An analysis of securities and principles governing the management of investment assets including risk management 

pertinent to insurance and real estate. Prerequisites:  FIN 300; ACCT 210 

BMGT 331  Safety and Security in Hospitality and Entertainment Venues                                          3 credits 
       This course covers safety and security in hospitality and entertainment venues, focusing on prevention, preparedness, 
regulatory compliance, and cooperation between businesses and government agencies. 

BMGT 332  Introduction to Entrepreneurship  

3 credits 

The course involves an introduction to the discipline of entrepreneurship and a study of the essential steps in starting 

and operating a smaller business. 

BMGT 333  Experiential Learning in Business Management 

0 credits 

An experiential learning experience enables the student to demonstrate their ability to apply knowledge and theory 
learned in the classroom. ELE also provides skill development through professional initiatives. Students will build valuable 
experiences through the completion of a project, special initiative, or working alongside industry partner. The student will 
provide weekly updates to the instructor and a final paper. Students must be approved prior to beginning their experience. 
This Pass/Fail course must be approved by either the Chair or Program Director of the Business Management program. 

263 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BMGT 335  Scaling Operations: Strategy to Execution 

3 credits 

This course is designed for those preparing to scale their own ventures or plan to evaluate such ventures through the 
lens of investors or consultants. With the objective to make strategic scaling decisions that are grounded in operational 
reality, we will approach the challenge of scaling by taking a holistic view that incorporates competitive strategy, financial 
evaluation, and the customer experience. More specifically, beginning with assessing the readiness of the firm to scale and 
the  required  steps  to  scale.  The  course  will  also  explore  whether  the  firm  needs  to  reformulate  its  strategy;  build 
competencies in-house versus outsourcing talent, and the risks associated with each option. Finally, students will consider 
implications of scaling such as designing the organizational structure, people, and culture for growth 

BMGT 336  Legal Aspects of Entrepreneurship 

3 credits 

A study of those legal and regulatory issues that entrepreneurs face in starting and operating a new small business.  
The focus of the course will be on training entrepreneurs to recognize those legal issues in the new enterprise before they 
become significant legal problems. 

BMGT 338  Quantitative Analysis for Business Decision Making 

 3 credits 

This course will prepare students to use quantitative analysis to inform business decisions. Statistical techniques and 
quantitative methods will be explored and then applied to business problems. Topics include use of formulas/mathematical 
equations/probability to make business decisions, and models such as linear programming, forecasting, basic inventory, 
and project management. Prerequisites: MATH 180, CMPS 101. Course Substitutions: HRM 320, SAEM 370 

BMGT 340  Organizational Behavior with Topics in Management   

 3 credits 

Examines the role of individual and group behavior within work organizations. Review the traditional theories of 
management. Topics will include motivation, leadership, group behavior, organizational structure, conflict management, 
and resistance to change.  

BMGT 341  Operations Management in the Hospitality Industry                                           
       This course will identify the resource requirements for the major functions or activities in the hospitality industry-what 
it  takes  to  run  a  business 
front  desk/housekeeping/human  resources,  and  food  and  beverage 
management(catering, banquets, restaurants, and room service). This course will explore what is required to operate these 
departments, and how to prepare budgets and control expenditures to manage profitability, while balancing service levels. 
Prerequisite: BMGT 231 

including 

3 credits 

BMGT 342  Research Methods in a Business Environment  
      This course explores various qualitative and quantitative research methods, experimental controls, data analysis, and 
scientific communication used in a business environment.  Upon completion of the course, students will know how to 
formulate  research  questions,  select  the  appropriate  research  methodology,  collect  and  analyze  data,  and  communicate 
findings and recommendations. The SHRM competencies will be addressed in this course including but not limited to 
Critical Evaluation. Dual listed with HRM 342 and MKTS 341. Pre-requisite: MATH 175. 

3 credits 

BMGT 351  Organizational Behavior in the Hospitality Industry                                         
        This course will cover the behavioral or psychological issues related to the hospitality industry: from the perspective of 
both guests and employees. Many techniques will be covered, including; conflict resolution, crisis management, human 
resource activities-hiring/orientation/training/role playing/union and labor relations and many others. It will also cover 
the corporate culture of a business and how to integrate employees into the culture. Prerequisite: BMGT 231 

3 credits 

BMGT 353, BMGT 354 Hotel/Restaurant Internship I, II  

3 credits 

Practical  work  experience  in  the  hotel  and  restaurant  environment  gained  through  a  coordinated  study  program 
between  the  department  and  participating  businesses.    Periodic  reports  of  the  progress  of  the  internship  are  required.  
Prerequisites: Junior Standing and permission. 

BMGT 355, BMGT 356  Business Management Internship I, II  

3 credits 

Part-time job experience approved by the department in a local business or industrial firm. Method of evaluation to 
be agreed upon by the departmental and job-site supervisors. May include periodic reports, a day-by-day journal and a final 
report. Prerequisites:  Junior standing and permission. 

BMGT 380  Cooperative Education I 

6 credits 

Cooperative education provides students with hands on experience in industry.  Students gain practical experience, 
enhance skills learned in the classroom, and acquire contacts with professionals in business.  This course requires students 
to complete 380 hours in the field, be evaluated by their supervisor and prepare a report.  Students must be approved prior 

264 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to beginning their co-op and should have a Q.P.A. of 3.0 or higher.  This is a Pass/Fail course. Prerequisite:  BMGT 280. 

BMGT 406  Operations/Production/Quality Management 

3 credits 

An integrated view of operations/production with regard to strategic planning and relationships with other functional 
areas.  The  operations/production  process  is  analyzed  with  emphasis  on  the  solution  of  problems  using  contemporary 
management  tools  such  as  linear  programming,  the  case  study  method  and  other  selected  mathematical/statistical 
techniques. Prerequisite: BMGT 310 

BMGT 410  Case Studies in Business Operations and Management  

 3 credits 

Case  studies  in  technical,  business  and  professional  areas  that  address  the  application  of  skills  developed  in  the 
professional studies program.  Emphasis on planning, scheduling and managing resources, as well as leadership skills and 
ethical issues in the workplace environment. 

BMGT 418  Portfolio and Career Planning with Assessment 

3 credits 

This  is one of the final courses for Human Resource Management Majors.    This course will be the culmination of 
all the work students have done in the program.  It requires students to collect evidence of learning outcomes throughout 
their course work program.  Students will be required to gather, organize, and reflect on work they have included in their 
portfolio. Students will present their portfolio using technology and audio-visual equipment to a professional audience. 
Additionally,  students  will  complete  a  series  workplace  practicum  modules  that  will  help  prepare  them  for  career 
placement/advancement and build a social network. And they will explore certification options, including the standardized 
for graduating seniors. Students will meet individually with the instructor to discuss various components of your portfolio.  
It is in the students best interests to work with others and share the projects that they plan to include in their portfolio.  
Prerequisites:  BMGT 318 Human Resource Management II, BMGT 419, Senior Standing. 

BMGT 421  Finance and Tax for Managers 

3 credits 

This course will cover Financial Planning and Tax Concepts related to benefits.  It will also cover Financial Analysis 
Concepts  needed  to  support  Cost/Benefit  studies  used  in  Benefit  Package  Selection,  Outsourcing Options,  and  Other 
Human Resource Management Decisions.  Upon completion of this course, students will be able to explain benefit options 
to employees, and will be able to apply finance and tax concepts to support decision making. 

BMGT 441  Cross-cultural Business Management 

 3 credits 

An overview of structure and functions of multinational organizations. Includes the role of the manager in various 
organizational settings, the influence of the manager and organization upon each other, comparisons of the effect of cultures 
upon organizations, managerial assumptions about people when designing organizational structure and the impact of socio-
cultural environment on the multinational firm. Dual listed as MBA 541. Prerequisites:  MKTS 304; ECON/FIN 306, 
ECON 421, MKTS 304. 

BMGT 448  Training and Development 

3 credits 

Presents basic formats of learning designs and use of resources. Students demonstrate their ability to set objectives, 
outline teaching and training strategies, prepare demonstrations for varying group sizes and conduct assessment of learner 
progress. Explores principles of curriculum development and utilizes these principles in the design of educational program 
for the adult learner. 

BMGT 452  Global Aspects of Entrepreneurship  

3 credits 

A review of the issues and challenges facing entrepreneurs around the globe focusing not only on start-ups in the 
United States wanting to do business in other countries, but the continued development of entrepreneurship in other 
countries.  Prerequisite BMGT 332. 

BMGT 453  Global Business Analysis  

3 credits 

This course provides an in-depth exploration of international business through a comprehensive case study analysis of 
a country chosen by the student. Emphasizing contemporary management practices, students will examine key economic, 
political, cultural, and regulatory factors that influence business operations within their selected nation. Through research, 
data analysis, and critical evaluation, students will assess market opportunities, business risks, and strategic approaches for 
conducting business in a global context. By integrating strategic decision-making and cross-cultural considerations, students 
will  develop  practical  insights  into  navigating  international  markets  and  fostering  sustainable  business  practices. 
Prerequisites: BMGT303; ECON421; BMGT441. 

BMGT 454  Advanced Entrepreneurial Applications 

3 credits 

An extension of the study of entrepreneurship by applying many of the basic principles of entrepreneurship in an 

265 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
advanced setting.  This would include a detailed analysis and preparation of a business plan for a new enterprise.  The 
course would also involve case studies showing how various enterprises have met and solved some of the unique challenges 
facing those types of businesses.  Prerequisite: BMGT 332. 

BMGT 457, BMGT 458 Fashion Merchandising Internship I, II  

1-6 credits 

Practical  work  experience  in  a  fashion-related  industry  gained  through  a  coordinated  study  program  between  the 

department and participating corporations,  Prerequisite:  Senior Standing.  

BMGT 480  Cooperative Education II 

6 credits 

The second cooperative education experience will provide students with an enhanced hands-on experience in industry.  
Learners  gain  practical  experience,  enhance  skills  gained  in  the  classroom,  and  acquire  contacts  with  professionals  in 
business.  This course requires students to complete 480 hours in the field, be evaluated by their supervisor and prepare a 
report.  Students must be approved prior to beginning their co-op and should have a Q.P.A. of 3.0 or higher.  This is a 
Pass/Fail course.  Prerequisites: BMGT 280 and BMGT 380. 

BMGT 481  Integrative Experience (Capstone) 

3 credits 

This capstone class requires students to interpret knowledge gained throughout their coursework in the University 
core and major program to conceptualize a business model (mission/vision/values), analyze a company’s business model, 
and create a business operations plan for a theoretical and/or actual company. Prerequisites: ACCT, BMGT, ECON/FIN, 
or MKTS Major.  90 or more credit hours completed.  Course Substitutions: CMPS 480, HRM 420, or SAEM 480.  

BMGT 482  Entrepreneurial Residency 

6 credits 

The Entrepreneur Residency course is a collaborative experience designed for undergraduate students which provides 
the  opportunity  to  work  closely  with  the  RSB  Entrepreneur  in  Residence.,  Entrepreneurial  Fellows  from  the  Business 
Accelerator,  and  domestic  and  international  clients.  This  immersive  community  of  practice  will  further  cultivate  an 
entrepreneurial mindset, develop soft skills, and potentially take new ventures to market. The long-term goal of this course 
is to deepen a regional and global pool of dynamic entrepreneurs that will have an influence within their respective spheres 
of influence. 

BMGT 194, BMGT 294 
Selected Topics in Business Management 

BMGT 295, BMGT 395, BMGT 495 
Selected Topics in Business Management I, II, III 

BMGT 296, BMGT 396, BMGT 496 
Independent Study in Business Management I, II, III 
Special Request Independent Study Fee: 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

BPMM – BROADCASTING 

BPMM 202 Introduction to Broadcasting 

3 credits 

A general overview of the broadcasting industry, key historical events and people and study of the existing economic 

and regulatory forces acting upon it. 

BPMM 216 Multi-Camera Video Production and Directing 

3 credits 

Multi-camera video production and directing concepts and techniques are developed and applied.  Students apply 
fundamentals of all multi-camera production crew positions, organize and direct crew personnel, and adapt multi-camera 
production skills for video productions.  

BPMM 223 Radio Production 

3 credits 

Study and practical experience at the WPPJ radio studio emphasizing the basic elements of radio program production 
and  direction,  including  technical  aspects,  basic  programming,  scripting  and  the  development  of  audio  materials. 
Prerequisite: COMM 110.  

BPMM 303 Motion Graphics   

3 credits 

The course introduces fundamental concepts for both motion and static graphics as applied to graphics, titles and 

266 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
promos for screen, including graphics and promos for television networks and film titles and logos for advertising.  The 
focus  is  on  design  presentation  and  development,  screen  composition,  graphic  transitions  and  content  for  all  areas  of 
television and web production.  Students will construct graphic elements and typography for use in projects while addressing 
issues of motion and dynamic relationships.  Prerequisite: GRID 103 or COMM 120   

BPMM 323 Media Programming, Distribution, and Sales 

3 credits 

Students will learn the processes and principles behind audio and video programming and distribution. The course 
will address the current landscape of broadcast and streaming. Students will also learn about economic and business factors, 
cultural issues, and legal and ethical issues that surround these industries. Prerequisite: BPMM 202. Dual listed with BPMM 
523. 

BPMM 329 Professional Video Techniques 

3 credits 

Intermediate field video pre-production, production and post-production concepts and techniques are developed and 
applied.  Students combine fundamentals of all three phases of the production to plan, produce and edit videos for non-
news purposes. Prerequisites: COMM 215.  Dual listed with BPMM 529. 

BPMM 341 Broadcast Copy Writing 

3 credits 

The  major  areas  of  writing  for  radio  and  television  that  have  to  do  with  continuity  between  programs.  Writing 
assignments  include  public  service  announcements,  commercials,  promotional  materials  and  telespots.  Prerequisites: 
COMM 215. Dual listed as BPMM 541. 

BPMM 423 Advanced Radio Production Workshop 

3 credits 

A course for the development of highly creative and talented students who need to refine skills to produce professional 

quality news, documentaries, features and commercials. Prerequisites: BPMM  223.  

BPMM 442 Advanced Television Production 

 3 credits 

In this course students will apply producing, directing, videotaping, writing, and editing skills to non-news television 
programming  they  create.    Programming  produced  will  air  on  U-View,  Point  Park  University’s  closed-circuit  television 
channel.  Prerequisite:  BPMM 216 and  COMM 215. Dual listed as BPMM 542. 

BPMM 447 Electronic Media Management 
     This course will introduce students to the fundamental theories and concepts of management in the media industry. 
Students  will  demonstrate  their  understanding  of  these  concepts  through  projects,  case  studies  and  management 
simulations. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior Standing. Dual listed with BPMM 547. 

3 credits 

BPMM 295, 395,495: SPECIAL TOPICS 

1-6 credits 

BPMM 296,396,496: INDEPENDENT STUDY 

                                                                 1-6 credits                                  

BUS – BUSINESS  

BUS 306   Professional Communication Practices 

3 credits 

Students will strengthen the effectiveness of their business writing and presentation skills through individual and team 
exercises.  Numerous  writing  assignments  and  a  development  of  a  portfolio  of  their  work  will  provide  students  with  a 
professional  reference  packet  for  use  in  their  chosen  career.  Various  methods  of  evaluation  will  be  utilized,  including 
feedback from peers. Prerequisite: Junior or Senior Standing. 

BUS 307  Professional Quantitative Practices 

3 credits 

To  prepare  the  students  with  quantitative  skills  needed  in  business  to  solve  problems,  measure  production  and 
performance, when necessary. The course will also expose the student to basic concepts in business statistics such as data 
sets, probability, random variables and statistical inference. These concepts will be applied in other Saturday Fast program 
requirements. Prerequisite: Junior or Senior Standing. 

BUS 401    History Perspectives and Readings 

3 credits 

This  course  will  explore  historical  events  and  individuals  who  shaped  leadership,  organizational  and  commerce 
practices of a variety of organizational types.  A special focus is placed on the role of history’s transferrable lessons to modern 
organizations. Prerequisite: Junior or Senior Standing or permission of advisor. 

267 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BUS 405  Accounting for Managers II  

3 credits 

Use of accounting information for management planning and control and the interpretation of accounting data as a 

management tool. Prerequisite: BUS 303 or Permission from Advisor. 

CE – CIVIL ENGINEERING  

Introduction to Surveying 

CE 205  
       A study of plane surveying and topographic mapping. Determination of land areas, construction surveys and layouts, 
control  surveys,  boundary  surveys,  route  locations  and  street  layout.  Provides  experiences  with  the  use  of  equipment, 
instruments, and the fundamental techniques of surveying. Prereq: EGR 205, MATH 181. 

3 credits 

Engineering Geology 

CE 209  
       A study of plane surveying and topographic mapping. Determination of land areas, construction surveys and layouts, 
control  surveys,  boundary  surveys,  route  locations  and  street  layout.  Provides  experiences  with  the  use  of  equipment, 
instruments, and the fundamental techniques of surveying. Prereq: EGR 205, MATH 181. 

3 credits 

Strength of Materials 

CE 213  
        Introduction to the mechanical behavior of materials, stress/strain , principle stresses and strains ( stress and strain 
transformations/Mohr's circle), stress-strain relationships. Determination of stresses and deformation for axial, flexural, 
torsional, thermal, and combined loadings. Determinations of stresses in pressure vessels. Prerequisites: ME 101, CE 212. 
Pre/Corequisite: MATH 190. 

3 credits 

Strength of Materials Lab 

CE 214  
       The laboratory exercise will introduce students to common laboratory equipment and techniques and will illustrate 
and extend some of the concepts that are discussed in class and the textbook. Students will also practice setting up and 
performing a laboratory. Students will also practice recording observations and presenting the results to an engineering 
audience. Pre/Corequisite: CE 213. 

1 credit 

Soil Mechanics 

CE 309  
       A study of the properties of soil and their application to design. Equations of consolidation, stress and settlement, 
stability of cuts, shear strength, subsoil stresses, bearing capacity, seepage-drainage and frost action. Prerequisites: CE 209. 

3 credits 

Structural Analysis 

CE 310  
       A study of the properties of soil and their application to design. Equations of consolidation, stress and settlement, 
stability of cuts, shear strength, subsoil stresses, bearing capacity, seepage-drainage and frost action. Prerequisites: CE 209. 

3 credits 

CE 315  

Concrete Structural Design 

3 credits 

 Study  of  reinforced  concrete  analysis  and  design.  Topics  covered  include  codes,  fundamental  mechanics,  beam 

bending, beam shear and beam deflection. Prerequisite or Corequisite:  CE 310. 

Steel Structural Design 

CE 316  
       Study of design and behavior of steel structures. Topics covered include the advantages and properties of steel, the 
availability of shapes, safety and risk, and the specification and use of design equations.  Designs approaches using current 
AISC documents will be presented for tension, compression, beam and frame members. Comments on connection practice 
will also be included. Some design assignments will be performed using commercial computer applications. Prerequisites: 
ME 212, CE 310.  

3 credits 

Soil Mechanics Lab 

CE 319  
        Standard laboratory soil test are performed to determine the physical and mechanical properties of soils.  ASTM test 
methods for moisture content, density, permeability, Atterberg Limits, compaction, particle size, and shear strength will be 
conducted.  Formal memo laboratory reports will be prepared.  Co-requisite/Prerequisite: CE 309. 

1 credit 

Environmental Engineering Technology I 

CE 320  
       A survey of the principles of environmental engineering technology including environmental chemistry, materials, 
and energy balance, water quality management, water and wastewater treatment, ethics, and government regulations. Pre 
req: CHEM 102, MATH 190, and EGR 101. 

3 credits 

268 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
Environmental Engineering Technology II 

CE 321  
       A survey on the principles of environment engineering technology including air pollution, solid and hazardous waste 
management, noise and light pollution, ethics and government regulations. Prereq CE 206 

3 credits 

CE  401   Construction Management 
        A study of the planning, administration, management, and cost of construction projects and an introduction to the 
methodology utilized in executing specified designs. Emphasis is placed on organization of construction firms, development 
of construction documents, theory of estimating and quantity take-off. contractual and management systems, scheduling, 
project administration and inspection of construction operations, and construction documents reading. Prereq: ECON 
202 

3 credits 

Civil Engineering Capstone 

CE 407  
       The central feature of this course is a team design project that includes all aspects of civil engineering design process 
from a proposal through the design, verification, and documentation of a finished technical product. the laboratory period 
is  devoted  to  the  design  project.  The  lecture  period  includes  presentations  and  discussions  on  engineering  project 
management, engineering economic analysis, professional ethics, and social factors in engineering design. Students working 
in teams will plan, design, and complete a faculty approved project that integrates technical and non-technical skills. The 
course will include case studies, online learning experiences, and both written and oral presentations. Prereg: 18 credits of 
Department Major Requirements at the 300 or 400 level. 

3 credits 

Foundations Design 

CE 409  
       Students apply knowledge of geotechnical engineering theory to the design of foundations and retaining walls. Use 
knowledge of shear strength, bearing capacity, and lateral earth pressures in their designs. Course content will include an 
introduction  to  shallow  and  deep  foundation  systems,  lateral  earth  pressure  and  earth  retention  systems.  Design 
applications in each arena will be included. Prereqs: CE 309 and CE 310. 

3 credits 

Transportation Engineering 

CE 410  
        A course in route location and safety design. The route location elements of the course include topics from:  travel 
demand and factors affecting preliminary route location, types of highway, use of topo maps for the selection of tangents, 
circular curve design and layout, vertical curves, and spirals. The safety topics include: reaction times, stopping distances, 
passing distances, superelevation and widening.  Brief coverage of the use of influence lines for the structural analysis of 
beam and truss bridges will also be covered. Highway design computer applications will be used on selected assignments. 
Prerequisites:  CE 205. CE 209, ME 102, and MATH 330. 

3 credits 

Fluid Mechanics 

CE 411  
       The  study  of  the  physical  behavior  of  incompressible  and  compressible  fluids  and  fluid  systems.  Hydrostatic  and 
hydrodynamic systems are considered. Fluid transmission and control applications include the design of weirs orifices, and 
valves. The determination of pressure losses in open and closed systems is covered. Other topics include the storage of 
energy by pressurized fluids in closed systems. Prerequisites: ME 102, MATH 210, PHYS 201. 

3 credits 

Fluid Mechanics Lab 

CE 412  
        Introduces students to the special tools used by fluid power industries and the manual skills required in implementing 
fluid mechanics applications. Special techniques in flow measurement and implementation. Prerequisite: CE 411. 

1 credit 

CE 418   Hydraulics 
        A study of flow in pipes, open channels and hydraulic structures. Brief coverage of runoff models, groundwater and 
wells. Prerequisite: CE 411. 

3 credits 

CET – CIVIL ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY 

CET 206    Environmental Engineering Technology I 

3 credits 

A survey of the principles of environmental engineering technology including environmental chemistry, materials, 
and  energy  balance,  water  quality  management,  water  and  wastewater  treatment,  ethics  and  government  regulations. 
Prerequisites:  CHEM 102; MATH 180; NSET 101. 

CET 212    Properties of Materials 

3 credits 

A study of atomic and crystalline structure as a means of understanding material behavior.  The influence of defects, 

269 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthening mechanisms and heat treatments are examined.  Mechanical strength properties in tension/compression, 
shear,  hardness  and  impact  and  related  test  procedures  are  investigated.    The  Iron-Carbon  phase  diagram  is  studied.  
Coverage also addresses ceramics, plastics and composites.  Dual listed as MET 212. Prerequisite:  CHEM 101. 

CET 317    Concrete Mix Design Laboratory  

1 credit 

Students will perform the basic tests used in the field of concrete mix design to determine if a mix is suitable for use. 
Test batches will be mixed, cylinders and beams will be produced, and compression and flexure tests will be conducted. 
Additionally, air permeability and slump tests will be presented. Prerequisite or co-requisite:  CET 315. 

CET 405   Software Tools for Civil Engineering Technologists  

2 credits 

A series of “Senior” design projects selected from the major Civil Engineering Technology specialties to be conducted 
using commercial engineering software. Projects may include:  surveying, drafting, mapping, geotechnical design, structural 
design, hydraulic design, highway location design and site development.  Project management and scheduling software will 
be covered. Students may substitute a project in a specialty not normally covered, with the permission of the instructor. 
Prerequisite: Senior Standing. 

CET 194, CET 294       Special Topics                                                                        

3 credits 

CET 295, CET 395, CET 495 
Special Topics in Civil Engineering Technology I, II, III 

CET 296, CET 396, CET 496 
Independent Study in Civil Engineering Technology I, II, III 
Specialized Instructional Fee. 

CET 499   Honors Internship in Civil Engineering Technology  
See BIOL 499 for course description. 

   1-6 credits 

 1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

CENG – COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 

CENG 150  Introduction to Community Engagement 

3 credits 

This course is designed to introduce students to the theories of communities and community engagement. Students 
will learn to assess community needs through human centered design thinking and explore approaches to social change, 
strategic planning, and conflict management. Students will learn about oppression, privilege and power and how they affect 
our  communities.  Students  and  faculty  will  participate  in  outdoor  education,  group  problem-solving,  and  community 
building activities. 

CENG 160  Introduction to Women’s and Gender Studies 

3 credits 

This course will address the question "What is Women's and Gender Studies?" and will deepen our understanding of 
gender  as  a  social  factor.  Students  will  examine  the  construction  of  identities  such  as  gender  and  biological  sex  across 
nations and cultures, within academic disciplines, and in popular media. Students will also seek to understand women's 
issues  in  the  U.S.  and  internationally,  paying  particular  attention to  how  race,  sexuality,  class,  and other  factors  create 
differences among groups. Students will take a renewed look at the world around us, examining ways in which power and 
privilege, societal ideas, and ignorance have contributed to what we think we know. Students will also explore ways in which 
we can work individually and together to promote social change in an effort to advance the equality of all people. 

CENG 170  Introduction to LGBTQ+ Studies 

3 credits 

This multidisciplinary course will explore topics in lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer culture and history. 
It will examine how sexual identities are socially constructed; are impacted by race, class, and gender; and have changed 
over  time  and  place.  Students  will  examine  ways  in  which  power  and  privilege,  societal  ideas,  and  ignorance  have 
contributed to how these topics have been studied and understood. Students will also explore ways in which we can work 
individually and together to promote social change to advance the equality of all people. 

CENG 250  Advocacy and Social Change 

3 credits 

This course addresses the question “What kinds of advocacy facilitates equitable and sustainable social change? Using 
a social justice framework, the course explores issues targeted by advocacy work such as inequality, injustice and oppression. 
The course will also examine ways in which we can work to promote social change and growth in an effort to advance the 

270 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equality  of  all  people.  This  course  draws  on  research  and writings  from  various  academic  disciplines  and  will  integrate 
information from academia, media, news and personal experience into our discussion. 

CENG 300  Human Rights in Theory and Practice 

3 credits 

This interdisciplinary course will explore the development and conception of the construct of “human rights.” It will 
introduce major theoretical perspectives and debates in the study of human rights. It will seek to understand human rights 
issues paying particular consideration to how race, sexuality, class, and other factors create differences among groups of 
people. Students will also learn about significant historical and contemporary human rights driven social movements both 
locally and globally. 

CENG 310  Social Entrepreneurship 
        Social entrepreneurship is a new and fast growing field of academic study and real world practice. In essence, social 
entrepreneurship is doing well financially by creatively solving social issues. This course introduces  students to both theory 
and practice of social entrepreneurship through highly experiential, interactive, and collaborative workshops. Working in 
a team and on a social issues they care about, students will learn system thinking skills., entrepreneurial mindset, skills, and 
tools to start up their own social venture or work in a social business. 

3 credits 

CENG 311  Human Centered Design 
       In this course, students will leverage the Human Centered Design process to develop strategic design solutions to 
complex problems, while considering real-life constraints such as technical feasibility, business viability, sustainability, and 
ethics.  Students  will  drive  a  project  from  conception  to  completion  to  explore  how  the  design  process  is  informed  by 
technical, engineering, and business techniques while maintaining a design and user-driven approach to problem-solving 

3 credits 

CENG 312  Digital Storytelling & Reporting 
        This course will prepare students to design marketing materials and impact reports to promote, monitor and evaluate 
social  innovation  initiatives.  Students  will  use  digital  technologies  as  tools  for  creative  multimedia  storytelling  for  the 
purposes of awareness, advocacy, fundraising and impact reporting. Students will learn the skills and tools needed to tell 
meaningful stories using symbolic and emotional appeals, think critically about the issues involved with evaluating programs 
and apply various types of tools to visualize their work. This may include brochures, public service announcements, video 
appeals, data visualizations or infographics, annual reports, and more. This course will include an applied project conducted 
for a community organization. 

3 credits 

CENG 350  Social Inequalities and Health Equity 

3 credits 

Social,  cultural,  historical,  political,  economic,  and  environmental  factors  have  led  to  unjust  health  outcomes  for 
specific population groups in the U.S. This course will provide students with an overview of current literature on health 
disparities, examine theoretical frameworks to understand health disparities, and analyze approaches and interventions that 
promote health equity. Prerequisite: CENG 150, CENG 250 

CENG 360  Feminist Theory 

3 credits 

This course is an overview of contemporary feminist theories that have shaped feminist thought and actions since the 
mid-19th century. The readings, lectures, and assignments in this course focus on some of the main theories, methodologies, 
epistemologies, and social movements in the field of women's and gender studies. The class material addresses some of the 
main issues in feminist thought from both US-based and global perspectives. This reflects the increasing trend to- wards 
more inclusive feminisms that reflect multiple geographic and socio-economic perspectives. The seminar and discussion-
based format of the course challenges students to raise questions, challenge assumptions, and seek answers about contested 
history and current status of feminist theory. Prerequisite: CENG 160 

CENG 395  Special Topics in Community Engagement 

This course will be home to special topics courses that will serve as electives in the minor 

CENG 396  Special Topics in Women’s and Gender Studies 

This course will be home to special topics courses that will serve as electives in the minor 

CENG 450  Community Engagement Seminar 

3 credits 

3 credits 

3 credits 

This field-based mentor-led seminar is designed to give the student practice working within a community leading a 
social change project. The seminar will cover a broad range of topics and responsibilities including, but not limited to: 
leadership, program development, advocacy, legal issues and responsibilities, the role of building community relations, and 
professional  development.  Collaboration  with  community  members  is  considered  vital  and  necessary  for  the  student’s 
professional development during the experience. The on-site mentor will assist the student by providing opportunities that 

271 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
coincide with the student’s identified objectives and goals. A log and project will be completed during the seminar. Pre- 
requisite: CENG 150, CENG 250 

CENT – CENTER FOR EXPERIENTIAL NARRATIVE TECHNOLOGIES 

CENT 101  Technology Trends of the 21st Century  

 3 credits 

The  CENT  101  course  introduces  students  to  cutting-edge  technologies  and  techniques  for  creating  immersive 
narratives  across  AI,  gaming,  augmented  reality  (AR),  and  virtual  reality  (VR).  The  curriculum  blends  foundational 
storytelling  principles  with  innovative  tools  to  empower  students  to  design  compelling,  interactive  experiences.  The 
interplay  between  course  concepts  and  overarching  skills—information  literacy,  communication,  problem-  solving,  and 
creativity/aesthetics—positions students for success in modern, tech-driven industries. 

CHEM – CHEMISTRY 

CHEM 101  General Chemistry I 

3 credits 

Topics  include  atomic theory  and  structure,  chemical bonding,  properties  of  the  elements  and  the  periodic  table, 
chemical  equations  and  stoichiometry,  states  of  chemical  matter,  equilibrium  and  kinetics,  thermodynamics  
electrochemistry and selected topics in descriptive chemistry. Laboratory section: CHEM 103. 

CHEM 102  General Chemistry II    

3 credits 

Continuation of CHEM 101. Laboratory section: CHEM 104. Prerequisite: CHEM 101. 

CHEM 103  General Chemistry Laboratory I 

1 credit 
Basic laboratory skills illustrating important chemical principles. Prerequisite or co-requisite:  CHEM 101.  

CHEM 104  General Chemistry Laboratory II 

1 credit 

The application of the principles of ionic equilibrium to qualitative inorganic analysis. Prerequisite or co-requisite:  

CHEM 102. Prerequisite: CHEM 103.  

CHEM 221  Organic Chemistry 

3 credits 

A systemic study of the compounds of carbon including both aliphatic and aromatic series. Special emphasis given to 

stereochemistry and reaction mechanisms. Prerequisite: CHEM 102. 

CHEM 222  Organic Chemistry II 

3 credits 

A continuation of CHEM 221 concluding with a survey of the elements of modern biochemistry. Prerequisite: CHEM 

221. 

CHEM 223  Organic Chemistry Laboratory 

2 credits 

Introduction to the fundamental methods of synthesis, isolation and analysis, including instrumental techniques. An 
individual project including a written report and oral presentation are required. Prerequisite: CHEM 103. Co-requisite: 
CHEM 222. 

CHEM 320  Biochemistry 

 3 credits 

This  course  addresses  the  aspects  of  enzyme  kinetics  that  govern  cellular  reactions.    Topics  also  include  protein 
structure and function, generation of metabolic energy, biosynthesis of macromolecules, processing of information, and 
membrane  transport.    The  information  is  then  integrated  in  terms  of  overall  metabolism  and  mutation  that  result  in 
metabolic diseases.  Dual listed as BIOL 320.  Prerequisite: CHEM 221. 

CHEM 194, CHEM 294       Special Topics                                                               

3 credits 

CHEM 295, CHEM 395, CHEM 495 
Special Topics in Chemistry I, II, III 

CHEM 296, CHEM 396, CHEM 496 
Independent Study in Chemistry I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

272 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
CHEM 499  Honors Internship in Chemistry 
See BIOL 499 for course description. 

1-6 credits 

CINE – CINEMA ARTS, FILM PRODUCTION, AND SCREENWRITING 

CINE 101  Introduction to Cinema 

3 credits 

This course is an introduction to techniques and technologies of cinema production. The fundamental principles and 
practices of producing, cinematography, editing, directing and sound-design will be studied. Both traditional film and state-
of-the-art digital tools and techniques will be discussed. 

CINE 102  History of American Cinema 

3 credits 

The course will focus on the history of American cinema, decade by decade, from the early experiments with moving 
images through the invention of sound, color, and digital effects. Students will study the evolution of cinematic form, style 
and language as well as the social and artistic impact of the medium on society. 

CINE 105  Introduction to Screenwriting  

3 credits 

This course is designed as an introduction to screenwriting. Students will, for the first part of the semester, learn the 
elements of storytelling and apply that knowledge to the analysis of short and feature length stories. For the second part of 
the semester, students will take the knowledge gained in the first part of the semester and apply it to short scripts that they 
will develop and rewrite. 

CINE 110  History of International Cinema  

3 credits 

This course is designed as an introduction to the history of international/global film. Students will screen films from 
around the globe and will study the economic and geo-political forces that shaped the film industries of certain countries 
and created film movements and genres. Prerequisites: CINE 102. 

CINE 150  Production I  

6 credits 

This course is an introduction to the basic principles and  practices of cinema production. Students will learn the 
fundamentals  of  single-camera  production  including  the  basic  aesthetic  and  technical  aspects  of  producing,  directing, 
cinematography and film editing. Lectures, screenings and in-class exercises will focus on teaching students the skills they 
need to produce, shoot and edit various projects for the class. Each project will incorporate new skills and demand a higher 
level of proficiency from the filmmaker. Student work will be screened and discussed in class. Prerequisites: CINE 101 and 
CINE 105. 

CINE 170  Introduction to Screenwriting for Non-Majors 

3 credits 

Introduction to Screenwriting for Non-Majors is designed for any student in the University not currently a Cinema 
Arts major.  For the first part of the semester, students will learn the elements of storytelling and apply that knowledge to 
the analysis of short and feature length motion picture stories.  For the second part of the semester, students will take the 
knowledge gained in the first part of the semester and apply it to the development of short scripts that they will write and 
revise.  This course employs a two-part, Lecture/Lab Workshop structure. 

CINE 201  Cinematic Representation 

3 credits 

This course provides students with the media literacy and film history knowledge necessary to critically look at how 
films have the ability to influence culture and how culture influences film.  Using the core principles of media literacy 
education  students  will  apply  critical  thinking  skills  to  film history  with  the aim of  chronicling  and  understanding  the 
cinematic representation of various cultural groups, stimulating discussion of human difference, and examining forces and 
institutions of bias.  Through reading, film viewing, writing, research, and discussion students will use reflective judgment 
to understand the relationship between film and American culture. Prerequisites: CINE101 or DIGI 101 

CINE 202  Zombie Cinema and the Rise of American Anxiety 

3 credits 

In this course, students will survey canonical films of the zombie oeuvre and examine the variety of ways filmmakers 
have used the zombie metaphor to examine society’s subconscious anxieties and fears. Students will engage with screenplays, 
texts and other media to analyze the prevalence and plasticity of zombies to shed light on the human condition.  

273 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CINE 205  The Narrative Structure of Cinema  

3 credits 

 An in‐depth analysis of the structure, formulas and storytelling techniques of the feature length screenplay will be the 
focus of the course. Students will study a wide range of successful films and discover the common elements that they share. 
Prerequisites: CINE 105. 

CINE 207  Survey of Media Writing  

3 credits 

An overview of a variety of forms including situation comedies, hour dramas, non-fiction films, theatre, and interactive 
media, this course outlines the fundamentals of style, content and format specific to each and gives students the opportunity 
to write in several different genres.  Prerequisite: CINE 105.   

CINE 208  Classical and Modern Drama  

3 credits 

Recognizing theatre as one of the cornerstones of cinema, this course is a survey and analysis of historically significant 
plays that examines common elements of dramatic structure, character development, and theme as they relate to, and have 
influenced, cinematic forms. Prerequisite: CINE 205 

CINE 210  Visual Analysis   

3 credits 

This course will introduce students to systems of critical analysis of visual images, particularly of the cinema. These 
include contemporary critical frameworks of cinematic analysis, as well as analysis of the visual components of images in 
media production, and how their manipulation can help communicate meaning. Prerequisite: CINE 150.   

CINE 250  Production II 

6 credits 

 A workshop course that builds upon the basic skills introduced in Production I to further develop students’ narrative 
storytelling abilities with an emphasis on effective collaboration. Students, working in groups on three productions, will 
alternate in the roles of writer/director, cinematographer, and editor. Prerequisite: CINE 150. 

CINE 301  Cinema Studies: Various Topics 

3 credits 

The CINE 301 courses are designed to allow students to explore the depths, via review and analysis, of specific periods, 
histories and topics of cinema already covered in the freshman year sequence of courses. Some of the courses already offered 
have been Film Noir; Women Filmmakers; The French New Wave, an Overview; The Horror Film; Five International 
Masters; Comedy on Film; and American Cinema of the 1970s-The Age of the American Auteur. Prerequisite: CINE 110. 

CINE 302  Cinema Authors 

3 credits 

The courses comprising the Cinema Authors sequence have been developed to pinpoint one specific filmmaker's work 
for analysis over the span of an entire term in order for the students to have a deeper understanding of artistic evolution 
and an appreciation of such. Courses already offered have detailed the works of Alfred Hitchcock, Woody Allen, Stanley 
Kubrick, Martin Scorsese, and Joel and Ethan Coen. Prerequisite: CINE 110.   

CINE 305  Intermediate Screenwriting  

3 credits 

 This course is designed for students who wish to advance their screenwriting skills and move beyond the introductory 
course. In the first half of the course students will be challenged to pitch an original short film idea and follow through 
with its development to a completed draft & rewrite. During the second half of the course, students will pitch an idea for 
a commercial feature length film, which they will continue to develop, culminating in the completion of a detailed outline 
of their feature. Prerequisite: CINE 205. 

CINE 306  Story Analysis  

3 credits 

Students will learn the skills of professional screenplay analysis, including, writing a concise plot synopsis, evaluating 
a script based on structure, character, theme and market ability, and developing a detailed plot outline. Prerequisite: CINE 
205.  

CINE 307  Screenwriters and Their Work  

3 credits 

Prominent screenwriters and the work they have produced are analyzed as both screenplays and as completed cinematic 
works to demonstrate how masters of the craft have successfully addressed the challenges of the form.  Prerequisite: CINE 
110.  

CINE 308  History of TV Entertainment - 1936-2000 

3 credits 

An overview of television as a means of popular entertainment, this course also examines how social, technological, 

and market forces have influenced the evolution of the medium.  Prerequisite: CINE 102.  

274 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
CINE 310  Intermediate Directing 

3 credits 

A workshop course on the fundamentals of film directing with a focus on directing actors. Students explore the basic 
relationship between actor, text and director. Students learn the craft and vocabulary of the actor through exercises and 
scene studies, and how to utilize that understanding in communicating with and directing actors. Other areas of study 
include the responsibilities of the director in each stage of the filmmaking process, basic staging for camera, and formulating 
on overall visual strategy for a project. Prerequisite: CINE 250.   

CINE 315  Intermediate Producing  

3 credits 

For students considering a concentration in producing, this course provides a detailed study of the responsibilities of 
the producer in pre-production, production and post-production, with a focus on the short film.  Topics include:  pitching, 
script breakdowns, scheduling, production management, personnel management, set operations, locations, and budgeting. 
Prerequisite: CINE 250.   

CINE 320  Intermediate Editing 

3 credits 

This course will focus on the conceptual development of editors as storytellers.  Students will study terminology and 
practical film editing techniques, while looking at artistic choices and technological workflow options.  This course will also 
afford hands-on experience with multiple non-linear editing software.  Students will apply these concepts and skills to a 
short film that they will edit throughout the semester. Prerequisite: CINE 250.   

CINE 325  Introduction to Visual Effects  

3 credits 

This course provides students with an overview of the tools used in digital media, using Adobe Production software 

(Illustrator, Flash, Photoshop and After Effects) and Maya. Prerequisite: CINE 250.   

CINE 326  Acting and Directing for Writers and Filmmakers 

3 credits 

In order to create successful screenplays, writers must have an understanding of how directors and actors interpret 
their work.  Students will have the opportunity to work as a director in analyzing and staging scenes, and as an actor in 
creating a character and developing a performance, with the goal of understanding the challenges of translating the written 
word to the stage or screen.  Prerequisite: CINE 150.   

CINE 327   Acting for Camera 

3 credits 

Introduction  to  traditional  modern  acting  techniques  from  the  perspective  of  a  filmmaker  with  a  focus  on  the 
discipline of acting for the camera.  The impact of frame composition, blocking and technical elements will be studied in 
the  creation  of  an  acting  performance.    Communication  between  Director  and  Actor  will  be  a  primary  tenet  of  the 
workshopped scene work of all students. 

CINE 330  Intermediate Sound 

3 credits 

This course teaches the foundations of film audio approaches and techniques.  It introduces students to sound theory, 
signal  flow  concepts,  sound  design  methods,  and  the  equipment  used  in  production  and  post-production  sound.  
Curriculum focuses on the use of sound in effectively communicating mood, tone and narrative.  Hands-on exercises will 
explore field and production sound strategies, production/post workflow, as well as the fundamentals of post-production 
processes such as sound editing, dialogue clean-up, foley, ADR, and mixing. Prerequisite: CINE 250.   

CINE 335   Introduction to Production Design  

3 credits 

This course is designed to introduce the concepts of cinema production design using practical exercises along with 
peer support and collaboration. Students will learn how to interpret the narrative, emotional, and psychological intent of 
the  script  and  translate  the  storytelling  process  using  visual  language  and  real-world  techniques  through  practicum/lab 
involving set construction. Prerequisite: CINE 250 

CINE 340   Intermediate Cinematography  

3 credits 

 Designed  for  the  student  considering  a  concentration  in  cinematography,  this  course will  focus  on  techniques  in 
rigging, lighting, and digital imaging.  Class exercises are designed to develop skills in narrative and documentary camera 
techniques. Prerequisite: CINE 250.   

CINE 345    Fundamentals of Documentary 

3 credits 

Fundamentals of documentary will introduce students to the history of the documentary film genre. In this film  
history course students will examine the modes, styles, and approaches to documentary films through lectures, screenings, 
and discussions.  

275 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CINE 350  Production III  

6 credits 

Students will work in groups to produce a narrative or documentary short that approaches professional quality. Each 
project  will  be  a  collaborative  effort,  created  with  involvement  of  a  student  screenwriter,  producer,  director, 
cinematographer, editor, and sound designer. Prerequisite: CINE 305, 310, 315, 320, 330, or 340.   

CINE 354    Alternative Forms Workshop: Various 

3 credits 

This workshop course covers the history, approaches, processes, techniques of alternate forms of media. These include 
television commercial production, experimental film production, web series production and music video production. The 
course is designed to allow students to explore modes of media outside of the traditional narrative filmmaking approaches 
covered in the Cinema Production curriculum. It will permit students to diversify their experiences with media creation, 
expand their skill set, and broaden their work portfolio. Prerequisite: CINE 250.   

CINE 361  Writing for Theatre 

3 credits 

In  this  course  students will write play  and,  in  doing  so,  will  explore  the  distinct  challenges  in  structure,  character 

development and theme involved in writing for theatre.  Prerequisite: CINE 305.   

CINE 362  Writing the Situation Comedy 
  With its origins in radio and its future in new media, the situation comedy has been a staple of television since its 
inception. In this course students study the classics of the genre, write an episode of a current situation comedy, and develop 
and pitch an original concept for a comedy series.  Prerequisite: CINE 305.   

3 credits 

CINE 363  Writing the Hour Drama 

3 credits 

One of the principle forms of entertainment on television, the hour drama has remained popular with audiences for 
generations.    In  this  course  students  examine  the  classics  of  the  genre,  write  an  episode  of  a  current  hour  drama,  and 
develop and pitch an original concept for a series.  Prerequisite: CINE 305.   

CINE 364  Writing for Multimedia 

3 credits 

Technological advances allow for content to be delivered to audiences in an ever-increasing number of ways and forms.  
This course examines the current entertainment media landscape and allows students to develop and write projects that 
are  designed  for  digital  distribution,  including  web-based  and  mobile  platforms.    The  incorporation  of  audience 
participation and other interactivity into storytelling will also be explored.  Prerequisite: CINE 305. 

CINE 365  Writing the Adaptation 

3 credits 

Many successful screenplays are adapted from other sources.  In this course, students will find pre-existing material, 
whether it is a book, short story, song, biography, or graphic novel, and develop it into a feature or web series or short 
script.  Students are encouraged to obtain the rights to any materials they choose to adapt.  Prerequisite: CINE 305. 

CINE 367  Writing for Video Games 
  Writing for Video Games is designed to provide students an introduction to the narrative gaming industry as well as 
cover the functions of the narrative video game writer.  Topics covered include game theory, history of video games and 
games consoles, game studios today, gaming structure, and the documents created in video game development.  Students 
will pitch and develop their own video game concepts along with corresponding documents to leave the course with a 
portfolio of materials.  Prerequisite: CINE 305. 

3 credits 

CINE 368  Writing for TV Animation 

3 credits 

Television animation scripts look very much like all other kinds of scripts. Yet there are numerous differences, some 
subtler than others, between writing for animators to interpret rather than writing for those who produce live-action motion 
pictures  and  television.  Writing  for  TV  Animation  provides  students  an  opportunity  to  explore  the  craft  of  creating 
speculative screenplays for existing television series, enabling each student to gain and in-depth understanding of what is 
required to work as a professional writer in the TV animation industry. Prerequisites: CINE 305 

CINE 369  Writing the Web Series 

3 credits 

Students  will  apply  and  practice  the  essential  elements  and  conventions  for  writing,  producing,  marketing,  and 
distributing the web series including concept, character, structure, budget, and audience.  Students will create and write 
the pilot episode for an original web series, as well as four polished episodes of their web series.  Prerequisite:  CINE 350 

CINE 390  Grip and Electric Workshop                                                                               

 3 credits 

An intensive workshop course designed to build upon the skills introduced in prior Production courses to further 
develop  students'  ability  to  identify  and  work  with  professional  Grip  and  Electric  Equipment.  Students  will  have  the 

276 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunity to gain extensive hands on experience with modern grip and electric equipment that is used in the commercial 
and film industry today. Pre Requisite: CINE 250 

CINE 399  Cinema Arts Practicum                                                                                         

3 credits 

This course allows students to gain practical, hands-on experience by acting as creative work/research assistants on 
projects being done by Cinema Arts faculty members or Point Park faculty members in other departments. The nature and 
scope of the work will be agreed upon by the student and faculty member, and approved by the Cinema Arts department. 
The goal of the practicum is to allow the student to broaden their knowledge on a particular subject, and to give them 
experience performing work at a professional level as well as meeting the deadlines given by their faculty supervisor. An 
additional opportunity for practicum credit is to work on an advanced cinema arts production in a capacity not being filled 
by a student that is completing that project for credit. (Some select examples-visual effects artist for an advanced cinema 
production, sound designer for an animation thesis, screenwriter for a production 4, production designer for a production 
4 project.) Students seeking approval for a student project practicum would be required to arrange to be supervised by a 
cinema arts faculty member. a 3-credit cinema student practicum requires generally 150 hours of work, however credits per 
hour could vary depending on the nature of the project. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing or above. 

CINE 401  Cinema Studies - Advanced Seminar 

3 credits 

An advanced course in Cinema analysis which explores the potential to which cinema can have a broader scope and 
a deeper consciousness, involving layers of idea and thought, both concrete and abstract, communicated through all of the 
components of the medium. Students achieve an advanced understanding of these ideas and processes, and then to be able 
to apply them in their own work. Prerequisite: CINE 301. 

CINE 405  Advanced Screenwriting 

3 credits 

This course is designed for students to examine, create and pitch an original, feature film idea, and through a writers’ 
workshop experience, develop it through outlining and crafting a polished first draft of a screenplay. Prerequisite: CINE 
305. 

CINE 406  Advanced Screenwriting II 

3 credits 

Recognizing that drafting a professional quality screenplay is a process that often requires more than one academic 
semester, this course is designed for students who have started projects in other courses and are interested in continuing to 
develop and rewrite the concept.  Students must have a completed draft at the start of the course.  Prerequisite: CINE 305. 

CINE 410  Advanced Directing  

3 credits 

A  workshop  course  that  focuses  on  directing  for  the  camera.    Students  experiment  with  various  visual  styles  and 
practice concepts essential to scene construction through shooting in-class scenes and a final project outside of class.  As 
the final elective class in the directly concentration, the course also focuses on preparing students for their Production 4 
projects and assisting them in determining a career path. Prerequisite: CINE 310 

CINE 412  The Professional Writer’s Life 

3 credits 

This course provides an overview of professional writing forms including writing for film, television, interactive media, 
journalism, broadcasting and public relations.  Students will engage with professional writers in various media to gain a 
comprehension of the professional writer’s life.  Topics will also include job search strategies, personal and business finance, 
compiling a professional portfolio, helping a student transition into a professional career. 

CINE 415  Advanced Producing  

3 credits 

This course is meant to serve as a workshop for the development and pre-production of a film project from a producer’s 
perspective.  It will cover the essential considerations involved with the evolution of a project from story concept through 
marketing  of  the  product.    The  course  will  also  expose  students  to  the  business  and  legal  considerations  of  producing 
motion pictures and other visual media. Prerequisite: CINE 315 

CINE 416  Rewriting the Script  

3 credits 

This course is designed for students to revise and polish an original, feature film script written in CINE 406, Advanced 
Screenwriting II, and through a writers’ workshop experience, develop it until the work is polished to the point of being 
market ready. This course is required for all students seeking a B.F.A. in Screenwriting and will also serve to facilitate and 
produce the revision of a capstone feature screenplay written by students seeking a B.A. in Screenwriting. Prerequisite: 
CINE 406 

CINE 420  Advanced Editing 

3 credits 

This course is designed to link conceptual and technical skills gained in previous courses with projects that emulate 
experiences found in the “real world,” while also increasing knowledge of different styles of editing outside of the traditional 

277 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
narrative realm.  Additionally, student will learn the basic terminology and skills necessary to become a professional assistant 
editor.  Prerequisite: CINE 320. 

CINE 425  Advanced Digital Effects  

3 credits 

 This course is the Advanced Elective in the Digital Tools sequence. Building on concepts covered in CINE 325, it 
covers compositing techniques, cinematography for visual effects, particle systems, and tracking techniques. Prerequisite: 
CINE 325. 

CINE 430  Advanced Sound  

3 credits 

This course focuses on advanced aesthetic approaches to sound design in effectively communicating narrative, using 
the methods and protocols of a professional post-production sound environment.  Students learn the skills and techniques 
required to complete a 5.1 film sound design and mix.  It also introduces students to emerging immersive sound formats 
and the acquisition and use the techniques of these formats. Prerequisite: CINE 330  

CINE 440  Advanced Cinematography  

3 credits 

Advanced lighting, filtration, and camera techniques will be studied along with post-production processes, including 
digital color timing.  Current best practices of the camera crew in narrative filmmaking will be examined.  Cinematography 
majors will have the opportunity to focus their studies on issues specific to their thesis project. 
Prerequisite: CINE 340. 

CINE 445  Documentary Production Workshop 

3 credits 

Students will work in groups to produce a short form documentary.  Genres and styles of non-fiction cinema will be 

analyzed and discussed. Prerequisite: CINE 250. 

CINE 451  Production IV 

3 credits 

CINE 451 is the first in a two-semester course sequence, along with CINE 452, for students completing their Cinema 
Production BFA thesis requirement over two semesters (Production IV). This course bridges the gap between school and 
the working world; students take the experience and knowledge gained as a cinema student and apply it to an advanced 
film  production  project.  Students  choose  their  project  with  department  approval.  The  schedule  and  production  of the 
project is determined by the student production and must be completed within deadlines established and agreed to with 
the instructor (s) at the onset of the course. Students are in charge of and responsible for their work in this course, including 
their collaboration with other production members to complete the work. All students must plan and prepare to be active 
participants in their chosen project. Prerequisite: CINE 350 and one of the following: CINE 410, 415, 420, 430, or 440.   

CINE 452  Production IV 

3 credits 

CINE 452 is the second in a two-semester course sequence, along with CINE 451, for students competing the thesis 
requirement over two semesters. Production IV bridges the gap between school and the working world; students take the 
experience and knowledge gained as a Cinema student and apply it to an advanced project of their choice Production IV 
is the capstone production course for an undergraduate in the (choice of concentration) of Cinema Production. Students 
have chosen their project with Department approval. The schedule and production of the project is set by student and 
instructor(s) at the beginning of the semester(s) and must be completed within agreed upon deadlines. Students are in 
charge of and responsible for their work in this course, including their collaboration with other production members to 
complete the work. (Choice of concentration) should plan and prepare to be active participants in the visual construction, 
production planning and postproduction of their chosen project. The instructor(s) functions as advisor and mentor for the 
student’s project, guiding the class meetings and feedback to aid the student(s) in achieving best possible finished work. 
Prerequisite: BFA Student and CINE 451. 

CINE 453  Senior Thesis I 
  Working with their Thesis advisor, students will propose a project for the creation of a written dramatic work.  Upon 
approval,  students  research,  develop  the  concept,  prepare  outlines  and  treatments,  and  write  a  draft  of  their  project.  
Emphasis is not only on the work created, but also in developing  a successful working process that writers can rely on 
throughout their careers.  Prerequisite: CINE 405.   

3 credits 

CINE 454  Senior Thesis II 

3 credits 

Continuing the work begun in CINE 453, students will complete the initial draft of their project and go through 

multiple rewrites to produce a polished, professional-quality work.  Prerequisite: CINE 453.   

278 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CINE 460  Cinema Arts Professional 

3 credits 

This Capstone course is designed to demonstrate a student’s accumulated knowledge and training of the learning 
objectives in the Cinema Arts Program.  Students apply their cumulative skills in the creation of long-form, well-researched 
written thesis  project  and  presentation with  a  focus on  cinema  production.  Students will  also  finalize  their  individual 
professions portfolios, which include a resume, cover letter, demo reel, and web presence.  Prerequisite:  Senior Standing 

CINE 194, CINE 294        Special Topics                                                               

CINE 498  Internship in Cinema and Digital Arts 

None – individualized based on internship location. Prerequisites: CINE 205. 

CINE 499  Independent Study in Cinema and Digital Arts 

CINE 295, CINE 395, CINE 495 Special Topics in Cinema and Digital Arts 

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

CMPS – APPLIED COMPUTER SCIENCE  

NOTE: Due to the dynamic nature of this ever changing field of study, courses are updated frequently. Please consult 
the actual degree requirements for the most recent course requirements that are available in the office of the Rowland 
School of Business.  

CMPS 101  Introduction to Applied Computer Science                                                       

3 credits 

This course covers foundational concepts and technologies in Applied Computer Science, as it relates to business. A 
broad overview of the field will be provided, with important concepts covered in more depth. Topics covered include, but 
are not limited to, decision support systems, data analytics, AI (Artificial Intelligence) and machine learning, cybersecurity, 
databases and SQL, software development, blockchains and related technologies. 

CMPS 160  Databases 

3 credits 

This  Database  course  surveys  topics  in  database  systems.  The  course  emphasizes  the  effective  use  of  database 
(management) systems. Topics include access methods, data models, query languages, database design, query optimization, 
concurrency control, recovery, security, integrity, client-server architecture, and distributed database systems. Hands-on use 
will be a key part of the course. 

CMPS 161  Networking and Security 

3 credits 

This course introduces basic networking and security concepts. It serves as a precursor to the more advanced and 
specialized networking and security courses. Coverage of topics focuses on identifying and understanding the nomenclature 
of hardware and software use in modern networks. 

CMPS 162  Introduction to Programming 

3 credits 

This course introduces basic programming concepts. Hands on programming will be a key part of the course. The 

course is designed to teach and reinforce basic programming techniques and strategies.  

CMPS 163  Business Analytics 

3 credits 

This course will provide you with concepts and tools to utilize data for making informed business decisions. We will 
start with the raw data and work our way to conclusions and examine all the intermediate steps in detail. Topics such as 
data collection, model selection, built-in assumptions, and uncertainty will be at the core of the course. You will familiarize 
yourself with tools to apply these concepts in practice. 

CMPS 214   MicroComputing I 

3  credits 

An introduction to spreadsheet, database management and communication software. A thorough understanding is 

achieved through laboratory assignments.  

CMPS 216  MicroComputing II 

3 credits 

Advanced  topics  in  word  processing,  spreadsheet,  database,  and  presentation  management  software.    A  thorough 

understanding is achieved through laboratory assignments.  Prerequisite:  CMPS 214. 

279 

 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CMPS 260  Data Structures   

3 credits 

In this course fundamental data structures will be explored that are indispensable when programming. Some major 
areas are objects, lists, arrays, stacks, queues, and more. Tradeoffs in terms of computational complexity and operations on 
these data structures are also discussed. Prerequisites: CMPS 162. 

CMPS 261  Server Management    

3 credits 

In this course, students will learn how to administer a server. This ranges from installing an operating system, remotely 
installing  software  packages  through  a  package  manager,  configuring  the  system,  managing  security  and  encryption, 
backups, to shell scripting. A big component of this course is lab work. Prerequisites: CMPS 162. 

CMPS 262  Advanced Programming    

3 credits 

This course continues where CMPS 162 and CMPS 260 leave off. The focus will be on problem solving but with a 
much higher difficulty level. The students will be required to write programs that involve multiple units of organization, 
e.g., classes. Several advanced algorithms will be discussed and should be implemented by the students. Prerequisites: CMPS 
260.  

CMPS 263  Cybercrime 
    The course provides an overview of the types of crimes that occur on online, how they are conducted  and by whom. It 
will introduce students to technologies to be used throughout this course and future courses. Prerequisite: CMPS 161    

                                                                                                       3 credits 

CMPS 300  Information Technology for Managers    

3 credits 

The  course  focuses  on  the  computerized  and  Web-based  systems  used  in  business.  Topics  covered  will  include 
knowledge  management,  customer  relationship  management,  enterprise  resource  management,  and  supply  chain 
management.  

CMPS 330  Electronic Commerce I 

3 credits 

This course provides information and analysis of e-commerce. Course topics include – e-commerce business models, 
e-commerce infrastructure, implementing an e-commerce website, e-commerce security and payment systems, e-commerce 
marketing concepts, ethical, social and political e-commerce issues, social networks, and how highly portable, place-aware, 
always-with-you personal devices are expanding the e-commerce environment. 

CMPS 355, CMPS 356 Internship in Computer Science I, II  

3 credits 

Part-time job experience approved by the department in a local business or industrial firm. Method of evaluation is 
agreed upon by the departmental and job-site supervisors. May include periodic reports, a day-by-day journal, computer 
programs with documentation, user’s manuals and/or demonstrations. Prerequisites:  Junior Standing and permission. 

CMPS 360   Survey of Programming Languages 

3 credits 

This course provides students with a wide array of programming languages and emphasizes strengths and weaknesses 
relative to a given problem. Students will work on a practical problem in a language of choice to gain real world experience. 
Prerequisites: CMPS 261, CMPS 262. 

CMPS 361   Web Application Development  

3 credits 

This course will provide a foundation in several facets of establishing and maintaining a website. This includes the 
latest advances in client side as well as server side technologies. The goal is to have students design, implement, and run 
advanced web applications. It will also cover in some detail the protocols required for web development. Prerequisites: 
CMPS 261, CMPS 262. 

CMPS 362   Networking  

3 credits 

Techniques for the design of computer networks beyond the user level are discussed. Perspectives on network design, 
estimation of traffic demand and application requirements, network cost analysis, topological design, and virtual network 
design, wireless network design issues are also discussed. Prerequisites: CMPS 161. 

CMPS 363   Digital Security  

3 credits 

This class will provide an overview of computer security.  The concepts of security in the context of the digital world 
will be discussed. The nuts and bolts of threat prevention, detection and removal are discussed. The student will be required 
to use a lab environment to simulate troubleshooting, preventing and fixing problems. Prerequisites: CMPS 161. 

280 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CMPS 364   NoSQL Databases  

3 credits 

This course explores modem databases that do not strictly follow the relational database design and SQL. Advantages 
and  disadvantages  will be  discussed.  Students  will be  required to work with at  least  one  NoSQL  databases  and write  a 
program that utilizes it. Prerequisites: CMPS 163, CMPS 261. 

CMPS 365  Cyber Analysis  
      The goal of this course is an introduction into the dark web, sources for discovering sites, and security precautions. 
Topics include intelligence and analysis topics such as link analysis, clearnet, and dark targeting methodologies .Prereq: 
CMPS 263 

                                                                                               3 credits 

CMPS 430  Electronic Commerce II 

3 credits 

A continuation of Electronic Commerce I and may include some of the topics in Electronic Commerce I or an in-

depth review of these topics.  Prerequisite: CMPS 330. 

CMPS 460  Mobile Application Development 

3 credits 

In this course, students will learn how to develop applications for mobile devices. Mobile devices are more restricted 
in screen space but also have new opportunities such as built in GPS. This course requires completing a group project for 
a given mobile platform. Prerequisites: CMPS 361. 

CMPS 461  Big Data Applications 

3 credits 

This course continues where CMPS 364 leaves off and focuses on architectures and implementations that are able to 

handle large data sets. For this course several tools will be applied to real data sets. Prerequisites: CMPS 364. 

CMPS 462  Data Mining  

3 credits 

A  follow  up  course  on  CMPS  163  that  is  much  more  technical.  In  addition  to  a  mathematical  understanding  of 
algorithms this course also lets students implement their own algorithms. Prerequisites: CMPS 163, CMPS 261, and CMPS 
262. 

CMPS 463  Entrepreneurship for Software Developers  

3 credits 

Course in which students will learn how to commercialize their ideas and software into a profitable business. The 
focus is on customer development, i.e., acquiring customers, and uses the lean business model canvas. The essential element 
of this course is to create a prototype and investigate whether a customer base can be identified. Prerequisites: CMPS 163 
and CMPS 361. 

CMPS 464  Software Development for E-Commerce  

3 credits 

The  course  will  give  students  a  clear  understanding  of  the  field  of  electronic  commerce.  Included  will  be  the 
fundamental  business  processes/plans  that  are  necessary  to  understand  before  conducting  electronic  commerce.  The 
student will learn principles underlying the construction of data driven systems, particularly relational ones, and apply these 
principles to an actual semester long group project. The project is a good sized one, and provides an opportunity ty for the 
application of software engineering principles. Prerequisites: CMPS 163 and CMPS 361. 

CMPS 465  Cybersecurity Policy 
       Presents corporate and national cybersecurity considerations, such as privacy, intellectual property, cybercrime, and 
infrastructure protection. Students will learn and demonstrate effective management and communication skills through 
case study-analysis, class discussion, and effective cybersecurity policy development. Prereq: CMPS 365 

                                                                                               3 credits 

CMPS 480  Senior Project 

4 credits 

In  this  course  the  student  will  demonstrate  their  mastery  of  material  undertaken  in  coursework  by  selecting  and 
creating  a  programming  solution  to  a  significant  business  application.  The  group  will  work  together  to  construct  their 
solution and present a working model of their problem to the class. This project is designed to give the student a hands-on 
demonstration of their coursework suitable for a portfolio of accomplishments. Prerequisites: All I.T. Core Classes. 

CMPS 194, CMPS 294 
Selected Topics 

CMPS 295, CMPS 395, CMPS 495   
Selected Topics in  Applied Computer Science I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

281 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CMPS 296, CMPS 396, CMPS 496   
Independent Study in Applied Computer Science I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

COMM – COMMUNICATION 

COMM 101  Oral Communication  

 3 credits 

This course included communication theory, as well as speech preparation, delivery, and communication technology. 
Student learning focuses on researching, composing, and delivering formal and impromptu speeches and presentations. 
Topics  include  research,  analyzing  and  adapting  audiences,  message  construction,  outlining,  delivery  of  messages  and 
effective use of visual aids and technology. This course will develop each student’s ability to communicate effectively with 
respect to audience and purpose. The major emphasis is on the preparation and delivery of presentations ranging from one-
on-one pitches, and small group discussion, to large audience speeches. 

COMM 105 Media & Society 

                                                            3 credits 

This course is a study of basic communication principles and the emergence of the concept of mass communication. 
It explores the responsibilities and influence of newspapers, magazines, radio, television, public relations, advertising and 
Internet sources in the modern social system. 

COMM 110 Media Literacy 
        This course will help students develop an informed and critical understanding of the structures, functions, and impacts 
of mass media, traditional and new, with particular attention to news messages. This is a vital skillset, as media messages 
dramatically influence personal identity, cultural norms, and representations of peoples on a global scale. It is an essential 
tool for both creators and consumers of mass media – in other words, everyone.  

                                                                                                    3 credits 

COMM 115 Media Storytelling                                                          

                                  3 credits 

Introduction to the basic skills needed to tell stories effectively through various forms of mass media, including story 
development;  fundamental  writing  techniques  for  print  journalism,  web  journalism,  broadcast  journalism,  and  public 
relations; journalistic writing style; proper grammar; story construction methods; and media literacy.   

COMM 120 Visual Storytelling 
      Introduction to visual storytelling for print and non-video digital platforms. Students will learn to use and apply the 
basic principles and elements of visual design to create non-video media products used by advertising, public relations and 
journalism professionals. Projects will include magazine page design, newsletters, brochures, infographics, specialty photos 
for social media distribution, and photo essays for print and digital publications. 

                                                                                          3 credits 

COMM 190 Podcasting 

                                                                                                            3 credits 

Students in this introductory podcasting course will learn the fundamentals of emerging podcast technologies, what 
podcasts are, why consumption continues to grow, and how to articulate this knowledge to launch their own podcast or for 
a  client/employer.  The  course  will  focus  on how  to  build  a  community  by  leveraging  social  media platforms  and  their 
algorithms, providing a path to create a brand that can be monetized. Students will gain hands-on experience with multiple 
podcast  setups,  learn  how  to  utilize  technology  to  execute  a  podcast,  and  acquire  confidence  in  holding  in-depth 
conversations about various topics. 

COMM 215 Video Storytelling 

3 credits 

This course provides an introduction to the terminology, technical and creative principles of single-camera video for 
electronic field production (EFP) and electronic news gathering (ENG). Students learn and apply the basic video production 
techniques of camera operation, aesthetic composition, sound, lighting and editing to create and produce short-form video 
productions. Prerequisite: COMM 105.  

COMM 289 Drone Storytelling 

3 credits 

This  course  is  designed  to  facilitate  students'  progression  through  various  levels  of  cognitive  engagement  while 
equipping  them  with  the  skills  needed  for  effective  drone-based  media  collection  and  content  creation.  Students  will 
practice the application of storytelling techniques in various drone-based projects, ensuring they are well-prepared to thrive 
in the dynamic landscape of modern media and marketing storytelling. The course will prepare students to take the FAA 
Part 107 certification test for UAS operations. 

282 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMM 290 Seminar in Media Studies                                                                                 

3 credits 

Students in this course will engage in critique and creation in various genres and types of media. The course will focus 
on  aesthetic  theory  as  well  as  other  critique  related  theory  and  the  application  thereof.  Students  will  connect  issues 
represented in media texts with issues in the real world. Students will also learn to view media texts through historical, 
economic, political, aesthetic, and cultural lenses. 

COMM 300 Career Preparation Seminar 

1 credit 

A combination lecture, discussion and critique of student work. The goal is to enable students to make educational 
and  professional  choices  early  in  their  college  years.  Surveys  employment  requirements,  duties  and  job-satisfaction  in 
professions  of  the  School  of  Communication  concentrations.  Topics  include  recommended  electives,  internships, 
networking, resumes, interviewing, portfolios and research sources. The course is required for majors. Students will take 
the course during their sophomore year. 

COMM 311 Practicum 
      School of Communication majors complete a practicum in a concentration of their choice. The goal is that students 
gain practical, hands-on experience through working as apprentices for various University media and applicable offices. 
Faculty  supervise  all  students  who  complete  an  agreed-upon  list  of  assignments  at  sites  such as  the campus  newspaper, 
broadcast studios, tasks in appropriate school offices and endeavors involving advertising, marketing, sports information, 
public relations, alumni affairs, or admissions and recruitment. A site supervisor will evaluate the student’s minimum 50 
hours effort for the semester. The site list is approved by the faculty, and will be expanded or reduced as needed. The 
practicum should be completed by the junior year to prepare students for internships at outside media, advertising and 
public relations agencies or appropriate corporate, governmental or community organizations. The practicum is pass/fail 
only and may be repeated one time. 

1 credit 

COMM 313 Internship I 

3 credits 

An on-the-job internship of about 150 hours of paid or unpaid work at a newspaper or other publication, a radio or 
TV station, photography studio or production company, public relations or advertising agency position, or business doing 
media activities. Prerequisites: Completion of sophomore-level core courses, basic courses relating to the specific field of 
the  internship  and  permission  of  appropriate  faculty  supervisor  and  department  chair.  (Note:  course  numbers  for 
internships determined by number of internships completed, not class standing.) 

COMM 320 Information Graphics 
       Information graphics are the result of using the rules of Information Design (one of the branches of Graphic Design) 
for  telling  news  stories.  They  are the  best way to  convey  statistical information,  locating  a  place  or  explaining  complex 
processes and procedures.  Information graphics represents the intersection of graphics, journalism and science.  The goal 
of the graphic is to efficiently communicate information or trends in other words, to help people learn. The focus is usually 
finding interesting or important patterns in the data and displaying them succinctly. 

3 credits 

COMM 321  Podcasting                                                               
        Students in the Podcasting course will learn the fundamentals of podcasting broadly, as well as specialized scenarios 
for sports podcasting. The course will address the variety of approaches to covering sports by podcast. Students will be 
acquainted with technologies for podcasting, from consumer-grade to professional level. Finally, students will develop their 
own storytelling skills in the creation of a multi-episode sports podcast. Prereq: COMM 105 

                                  3 credits 

COMM 380 Cooperative Education 

                                                                                       3 credits 

Cooperative  education(Co-Op)  provides  students  with  paid  hands-on  experience  in  the  industry.  Students  gain 
practical professional experience, enhance skills learned in the classroom, and acquire contacts with professionals in the 
business. This course requires students to complete a minimum of 384 hours in the field as well as complete complementary 
coursework that will enhance the co-op experience. Co-Op experiences must be approved by the Chair of the School of 
Communication prior to beginning work. Credit can only be earned in the semester that the co-op is taking place and no 
credit will be granted for past co-ops. This is a Pass/Fail course. 

COMM 390  International Media 

3 credits 

This  course  combines  classroom  preparation  and  study  in  an  international  setting  of  the  media  for  a  designated 
country. Students will compare and contrast the designated country and U.S. media models, regulations, production, and 
content. This course may be repeated one time, and only if it is to a different country than the previous one taken by the 
student. If the course is repeated, the second iteration may only count towards student’s General Elective Requirement. 
Prerequisites:  COMM  105  plus  one  COMM  200  level  in  the  student’s  major  area  of  concentration  and  Sophomore 
Standing. 

283 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMM 412 Media Ethics and Responsibilities  

3 credits 

Examines  the  ethical  issues  presented  in  the  modern  media,  including  their  historical  context  and  practical 
ramifications. The course compares and contrasts ethical standards and systems with professional processes and practices. 
Prerequisites: COMM 105 and 75+ Credits. 

COMM 413 Internship II 

3 credits 

An on-the-job internship of about 150 hours of paid or unpaid work at a newspaper or other publication, a radio or 
TV station, photography studio or production company, public relations or advertising agency position, or business doing 
media activities. Prerequisites: Completion of sophomore-level core courses, basic courses relating to the specific field of 
the  internship  and  permission  of  appropriate  faculty  supervisor  and  department  chair.  (Note:  course  numbers  for 
internships determined by number of internships completed, not class standing.) 

COMM 418 Communication Law and Regulation  

3 credits 

Study of contemporary and classic cases related to state and federal law of freedom of the press and freedom of speech 
implied by the First Amendment and federal agencies. Problems caused by efforts by government to control mass media 
and freedom of government/public information are also addressed. Students will write a term paper. Prerequisites: COMM 
105 and 75+ credits.   

COMM 420 Diversity and Communication 
      Questions of difference play a fundamental role in the functioning of society. In this class, students will view social 
groupings through the lens of the mass media, examining the ways in which media creates, resists, and/or reflects these 
differences 

                                                                           3 credits 

COMM 470 Technology Mediated Communication 
      Examination of technology mediated communication with special attention to the role of communication technology 
in  diverse  settings  ranging  from  interpersonal  to  group  communication,  organizational  communication,  and  business 
communication. Emphasis is placed on strategies for communication problem solving in mediated contexts. Dual Listed 
with MULT 516 

                                                          3 credits 

                                                                                 3 credits 

COMM 471 Global Communication 
     The  information  and  communication  technologies  revolution  generates  a  flow  of  global  communications  that 
transcend  national  boundaries.  This  course  focuses  on  the  emergence  and  growth  of  communication  channels  and 
networks that operate on a global scale. Emphasis is placed on the opportunities for human communication brought by 
globalization,  such  as  opening  new  communicative  spaces,  increasing  social  interconnectedness,  adding  platforms  for 
participation  and  challenges  associated  with  the  global-local  divides.  Enables  students  to  improve  their  ability  to 
communicate and use technology effectively and appropriately in an increasingly globalized world. Dual Listed with JOUR 
517. 

COMM 472 Communication, Technology, and Culture 
         This  course  is  for  students  who  wish  to  attain  a  comprehensive  vision  of  communication  and  broaden  their 
perspectives across the traditional fields. It explores the intersection of communication, technology and culture with a focus 
on six major areas: information, networking, socialization, identity, entertainment, and globalization. Covers issues such as 
technological determinism, social shaping of communication technologies, identity formation, cultural transnationalism 
and globalization. Dual listed with JOUR 545. 

                                                 3 credits 

COMM 490  Media Entrepreneurship 
        Students in this course will learn to identify potential business concepts, assess their viability, and create business 
plans. In addition, students will learn to analyze the media business marketplace to determine opportunities for growth, 
whether  in  their  own  business  or  as  part  of  another  organization.  Prerequisite:  COMM  105,  COMM  110,  and  Junior 
Standing.  

                                                                                  3 credits 

COMM 295, 395,495: SPECIAL TOPICS 

1-6 credits 

COMM 296,396,496: INDEPENDENT STUDY 

                                                                 1-6 credits                                  

284 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COPA – CONSERVATORY OF PERFORMING ARTS 

COPA 250  The Arts and Human Experience I: The Roots 

3 credits 

An overview of artistic forms of expression from selected cultures with particular reference to Dance, Theatre, Music, 
and the Visual Arts. Students will explore how the arts reflect social, political, and religious conditions in a spectrum of 
cultures and civilizations. Prerequisite: ENGL 101. 

COPA 252  The Art of Creative Nonfiction 

3 credits 

A course covering a broad range of prose including essay, memoir, biography, autobiography, and expository writing, 
as well as some fiction and short story as it has been practiced in western culture over the past five hundred years.  The 
course will cover historic, generic, formal, and thematic aspects of prose.  Students will be expected to analyze and perform 
close readings of individual prose texts examining content, technical aspects, and context, and to share those interpretations 
both verbally and in writing, as well as to create imaginative text of their own authorship (personal essay, memoir, etc.) that 
reflects the conventions of the genre.  Prerequisite: ENGL 101 or equivalent.  Dual listed as ENGL 252. 

COPA 253  The Art of Poetry 

3 credits 

A course covering a broad range of lyric poetry as it has been practiced in western culture over the past five hundred 
years.  The course will cover historic, generic, formal, and thematic aspects of poetry.  Students will be expected to analyze 
and  perform  close  readings  of  individual  poems  including  content,  technical  aspects,  and  context,  and  to  share  those 
interpretations both verbally and in writing, as well as to create imaginative text of their own authorship (poetry) that reflects 
the conventions of the genre of poetry.  Prerequisite:  ENGL 101 or equivalent. Dual listed as ENGL 253. 

COPA 254  The Art of the Short Story  

3 credits 

A course covering the development of the short story as it has been practiced in Western culture over the past two 
hundred years. The course will cover historic, generic, formal, and thematic aspects of the short story. Students will be 
expected to analyze and perform close readings of individual texts, examining content, technical aspects, and context, and 
to share those interpretations both verbally and in writing. Prerequisite: ENGL 101 or equivalent.  Dual listed as ENGL 
254. 

COPA 194, COPA 294        Special Topics                                                               

3 credits 

CRMJ – CRIMINAL JUSTICE 

CRMJ 150  Introduction To Criminal Justice 

3 credits 

Provides  a  general  overview  of  the  criminal  justice  system,  including  history,  current  role,  developments,  and 
constitutional implications of law enforcement; describes the major agencies: police, prosecution, courts, corrections and 
interdependence. 

CRMJ 151  Evolution of Policing 

3 credits 

Comprehensive study of the evolution of policing in America including the political era, the Professional era and the 

Community and post-911 eras, through to the contemporary policing era.  

CRMJ 201  Constitutional Law for Law Enforcement 

3 credits 

The practical application of U.S. Supreme Court decisions on local, state and federal law enforcement.  Particular 
emphasis is given to the First, Second, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Eighth amendments.  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150 and CRMJ 
151.  

CRMJ 220  Professional Communications in Criminal Justice  

3 credits 

This is a report writing and presentation class geared to police, legal personnel, correctional officers and other criminal 
justice personnel who must write effective reports and affidavits for the court, testify before the court, and complete legal 
forms (writing-in-the-discipline course).  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150. 

CRMJ 230  Ethics and Professional Responsibility 

3 credits 

This is a course in applied ethics for those interested in criminal justice.  This course explains the criteria necessary 
for an ethical issue as well as a discussion of ethical systems.  The class focuses on ethics for police, courtroom personnel 
and correctional officers as it applies to their day-to-day operations, and deals with specialized ethical issues involved in the 
criminal justice community.  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150. 

285 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRMJ 250  Criminal Law and Procedure 

3 credits 

Is a comprehensive study of sources, distinctions, and limitations relating to substantive and procedural criminal law; 
the development of the criminal law and procedure in the United States; the principles of criminal liability; the various 
crimes and their elements; the criteria considered in determining capacity and defenses. Emphasis is on the role of criminal 
justice personnel  in the  criminal law process  as  they perform  their duties  within  the prescribed  procedural  framework. 
Prerequisite: CRMJ 150. 

CRMJ 251  Criminology 

3 credits 

Surveys the major trends and issues in law enforcement, including the historical and contemporary development of 
the police role in society. Analyzes police behavior and attitudes affecting their relationship with the community they serve, 
as well as the legal framework within which they operate. Prerequisite: CRMJ 150. 

CRMJ 254  Juvenile Justice 

3 credits 

Examines the history and philosophy of juvenile justice in America and the impact of present societal reforms on the 
juvenile system.  A wide array of theoretical positions will be system operates will highlight the differences in adult and 
juvenile law.  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150.  

CRMJ 261  The Courts and Criminal Trial  

3 credits 

Examines the operation of state and federal courts, while examining the origin and development of the court system. 

Emphasis is on the role and administration of the court in criminal justice. Prerequisite: CRMJ 150. 

CRMJ 262  Corrections, Probation & Parole 

3 credits 

Introduction into the history and use of jails, prisons, pre-trial release, corrections, community corrections programs, 
including those judged to be at higher risk to re-offend and thus have greater treatment needs.  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150.  

CRMJ 281  Community-Based Corrections  

3 credits 

Examines the history, theory, and practice of corrections in the community, with emphasis on diversion probation, 

parole, halfway houses, and other alternatives to incarceration. Prerequisite: Upper division status. 

CRMJ 290 History of Organized Crime 

3 credits 

Explores the origin of traditional organized crime including the Mafia, Triads, Yakusa and drug cartels in the United 
States over the past 80 plus years.  The student will analyze the roots and organizational structure of these organizations, 
with particular focus on one specific organized crime group.  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150.  

CRMJ 194,CRMJ  294       Special Topics                                                                  3 credits 

CRMJ 304  Competitive Exams & Hiring Process 

3 credits 

Positions in law enforcement require the taking of tests for placement and extensive oral exams and interviews.  This 
course will require the student to take multiple mock federal and state law enforcement competitive exams; participate in 
mock  interviews  and  complete  standard  applications  in  order  to  equip  the  student  with  appropriate  test  taking  and 
interview skills.  Prerequisites: ENGL 101, MATH 150, CRMJ 150, CRMJ 220 and Senior Standing.   

CRMJ 305  Joint Task Force 

3 credits 

Examines the concept of task force investigations and their strengths and weaknesses.  It explains the evolution of the 

task force concept and the underlying operations of task force operations.  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150.   

CRMJ 313  Sex Crimes Investigation 

3 credits 

Comprehensive study of issues and trends to violence against women by examining a collection of twenty-three classic, 
groundbreaking papers that have shaped the field of violence against women.  The major themes will be: Sexual Violence 
Against Women; Physical Violence Against Women; and Perpetrators of Violence Against Women.  Each theme will seek 
a meaningful and thought provoking dialog concerning how violence impacts women and how perpetrators are processed 
through the criminal justice system.  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150.   

CRMJ 315  Quantitative Methods  

3 credits 

Introduction to mathematical and statistical tools used routinely by criminal justice and law enforcement professionals 
to  analyze  crime  data.  Statistical  methods  for  data  analysis  will  be  a  focus.    Computer  analysis  using  SPSS  will  enable 
students to analyze and plot data; understand the rules of probability and conditional probability, distributions, random 
variables,  sampling,  confidence  interval  estimates,  hypothesis  testing,  regression  analysis  and  correlation.    Prerequisite: 
MATH 150.   

286 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRMJ 330  Risk Assessment & Investigation 

3 credits 

The student will become familiar with the National Threat Initiative for local or national response.  The course will 
also cover an overview of investigative techniques as they apply to terrorism including technical investigative techniques.   

CRMJ 351  Research Methods and Design 

3 credits 

Provides  an  introduction  and  overview  of  the  methods,  designs,  and  measurements  used  in  criminal  justice  and 
criminology research.  Students will learn about the application of theoretical frameworks, research designs, data collection, 
sampling procedures and the methods used to measure crime.  The evaluation of the quality of research performed by 
others will be a focus of the course.  Students will be introduced to computer data analysis using SPSS.  Students who 
intend to go to graduate school should take this course.  Prerequisites: MATH 150, CRMJ 150 and Junior Standing.    

CRMJ 352  Fraud Investigations 

3 credits 

This course studies the multi-faceted nature of white-collar criminal activity.  It will discuss the numerous varieties of 
this activity, as have been discovered over thirty plus years of investigation by law enforcement at all levels in our society.  
The  course  focus  is  on  the  proliferation  of  political  corruption  concentrating  on  the  structural  features  of  certain 
institutions that facilitate malfeasance on the part of politicians and elected officials.  Prerequisites: CRMJ 150 and CRMJ 
361.  

CRMJ 361  Criminal Evidence 

3 credits 

Comprehensive study of the basic principles of criminal evidence for law enforcement personnel. Includes analysis of 
the  rules  of  evidence  as  well  as  other  evidentiary  and  procedural  requirements,  focusing  upon  problems  of  relevancy, 
impeachment, burden of proof, and presumptions. Reviews some constitutional guidelines affecting evidence collection 
and admissibility. Prerequisite: CRMJ 150 and Junior or Senior Standing. 

CRMJ 362  Criminal Investigation 

3 credits 

An  introduction  to  the  fundamentals  of  criminal  investigation,  crime  scene  search  and  recording,  collection  and 
preservation of evidence, scientific aids, modus operandi, sources of information, interviews and interrogation, follow-up, 
and case preparation.  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150. 

CRMJ 364  Money Laundering  

3 credits 

This  course  covers  money  laundering  as  described  in  Title  18  USC  §§  1956,  1957  and  refers  to  the  process  of 
concealing the source of illegally obtained money.  The various sophisticated methods by which money may be laundered 
and  the  investigative  methods  utilized  to  uncover  those  schemes  are  identified.    Prerequisites:  CRMJ  150  and  Junior 
Standing.   

CRMJ 365  White Collar Crime 

3 credits 

This course studies the multi-faceted nature of white-collar criminal activity.  It will discuss the numerous varieties of 
this activity, as have been discovered over thirty plus years of investigation by law enforcement at all levels in our society.  
The  course  offers  a  broad  understanding  of  not  only  the  white-collar  activities;  but  also  their  impact  domestically  and 
internationally on the economics of nations.  Further, this course will explore not only white collar crime perpetrated by 
traditional criminal elements, but also by those who have been engaged in such activity that were heretofore believed to be 
respected  corporations  and  businessmen.    Finally,  the  course  examines  the  proliferation  of  political  corruption 
concentrating on the structural features of certain institutions that facilitate malfeasance on the part of politicians and 
elected officials. 

CRMJ 395  Selected Topics in Criminal Justice 

3 credits 

Provides the opportunity for the department to offer courses in areas of departmental major interest not covered by 

the regular courses. 

CRMJ 400  Transnational Criminal Activities  

3 credits 

Throughout most of its history, criminal justice has been principally preoccupied with crime and its control as a local 
phenomenon.  In  the  21st    century,  criminal  justice  has  found  it  necessary  to  expand  its  concern  to  an  international 
perspective. The influence of foreign subjects victimizing U.S citizens, as well as laundering illegally obtained funds in other 
countries, requires the student to understand the expansion of common or complex crimes transnational. This course will 
be writing intensive, and will require the student to incorporate previous lessons into their writings. Prerequisite: CRMJ 
150 and Senior Standing. Senior Capstone.   

CRMJ 403  Federal Law Enforcement 

3 credits 

Comprehensive examination of criminal investigative responsibilities of the various federal law enforcement agencies 

287 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the United States. It will compare and contrast the different responsibilities and missions of the various agencies, with 
respect to existing criminal statutes.  Prerequisite: CRMJ 150, CRMJ 151 and CRMJ 250. 

CRMJ 404  International Criminal Law 

3 credits 

Comprehensive  study  of  issues  regarding  crimes  against  a  body  of  international  law  designed  to  prohibit  certain 
categories  of  conduct  commonly  viewed  as  serious  atrocities  and  to  make  perpetrators  of  such  conduct  criminally 
accountable for their perpetration.  Principally, it deals with genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity, as well as the 
War of aggression.  Prerequisite: Senior Standing.   

CRMJ 411  Community Relations and Criminal Justice 

3 credits 

A systematic treatment of the relationship between communities and law enforcement agencies with special emphasis 
on  the  effects  of  race  and  ethnicity  on  community/police  relationships.  Discussions  of  the  impact  of  law  enforcement 
agencies on community welfare, economic opportunities, criminal behavior, victimization, and different judicial processing. 
Analysis of the impact of assimilation and acculturation on criminal behavior, victimization, and criminal justice processes. 

CRMJ 415  Women, Crime and Justice 

3 credits 

This course will present contemporary issues and trends concerning women and their interactions with the criminal 
justice system. The major themes will be: Women as Professionals; Women as Offenders; and Women as Victims. Each of 
these themes will be treated within the context of police, courts, and corrections. 

CRMJ 420  Re-thinking Rehabilitation and Re-entry 

3 credits 

Addresses  issues  of  how  offenders  should  be  rehabilitated  and  how  can  they  be  prepared  for  re-entry  to  their 
communities and society.  These are very pressing questions that must be addressed.  Prerequisites: CRMJ 150, CRMJ 262 
and Senior Standing.   

CRMJ 455  Internship in Criminal Justice 

3 credits 

Internships  offer  planned  programs  of  research,  observation,  study,  and  work  in  selected  criminal  justice  agencies 
representing the major components of the system. Designed to supplement classroom study with constructive participation 
in the criminal justice system of communities, of the United States, and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Prerequisites: 
CRMJ 150 and Junior or Senior Standing. 

CRMJ 470  Criminal Profiling 

3 credits 

This  course  covers  the  fundamental  techniques  of  this  behavioral  and  investigative  tool  that  is  intended  to  help 
investigators in order to identify unknown criminal subjects or offenders.  Prerequisites: CRMJ 150, CRMJ 361 and Junior 
or Senior Standing.   

CRMJ 472  Methods of Security 

3 credits 

Relationships of private protective services with public law enforcement. Individuals, businesses, and governments 
providing  prevention,  protection,  investigation  and  disaster  recovery  services.  Protection  of  persons,  property,  and 
information. Methods of determining foreseeable of security incidents and adequacy of security programming in light of 
this foreseeable. Negligence proofing and concepts of legal liability. Discussion of industry standards and practices. 

DANC – DANCE 

DANC 105  Tap Dance I 

1 credit 

This course offers an exploration of tap dance styles and techniques, providing students with a solid foundation in 
basic tap dance vocabulary. Through practical learning exercises and theoretical discussions, students will develop a strong 
understanding and appreciation for the art of tap. By the end of this course, students will apply a better sense of rhythm 
and timing, recognize weight change, and possess a comprehensive understanding of tap dance styles and vocabulary. 

DANC 106  Cultural Dance Forms I 

1 credit 

This course serves as an introduction to basic steps, patterns and formations found in the dances of selected nations 
or ethnographic region, including non-western dance forms. Supplemental information will include geographic, historic 
and cultural context with additional emphasis on musical forms and meters. 

288 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DANC 107  Character Dance I 

1 credit 

A study of the theatrical adaptation of folk dances from Hungary, Russia, Poland, Italy, and Spain. Character Dance 
technique is built upon folk dance movements combined with a knowledge of classical ballet technique. Prerequisite: BAL 
121. 

DANC 109  Elements of Production for Dancers I 

This course provides an introduction to the technical aspects of dance production. 

DANC 115  Music Fundamentals for Dancers 

2 credits 

2 credits 

Foundation for music reading, eurhythmics, and aural discrimination through specific keyboard, movement and ear 

training exercises. Integrates specific applications to dance. Dual listed as MUS 115. 

DANC 130, DANC 131 Production/Rehearsal/Performance I, II 

1 credits 

Production components of the dance curriculum. Performance opportunities with the Playhouse Dance Company 

and/or crew assignments will be included. 

DANC 153  Dancer Wellness 

                                                                                                   1 credit 

The  student  will  deepen  their  understanding  of  dancer  wellness  as  a  lifestyle.  This  course  will  introduce  tools  to 
evaluate  the  foundations,  mental  components,  physical  aspects,  and  nutritional  needs  involved  in  designing  a 
comprehensive dancer wellness plan that can be used to prolong and enhance a dancer's career. The student will receive 
detailed insight into the research conducted by the International Association for Dance Medicine and Science. ( IADMS) 
and  their  experts  from  around  the  globe.  The  course  is  designed  to  facilitate  learning  through  in-class  activities  and 
discussion. 

DANC 163  Somatic Preparation for Technique  

1 credit 

This  course  will  assess  the  general,  physical  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  students.    Specific  fitness  needs  will  be 
formatted  into  a  prescribed  set  of  exercises  that  will  condition  the  following  areas:    cardio  vascular  strength;  muscular 
strength; muscle stamina; flexibility; balance; rhythmic time; orientation to space; and neuro-muscular sensitivity.   This 
course focuses on corrective patterning and cross-training media for the dancer. Instruction supplements traditional dance 
vocabulary with exercises on balance, posture, and equilibrium, weight training and isometrics -- empowering students to 
prevent  and  remedy  strain  and  injury,  building  confidence  in  physical  exertion,  and  thus  enhancing  artistry  of  dance. 
Prerequisite: Dance major/standardized fitness testing 

DANC 180  Dance Improvisation 

1 credit 

This  course  develops  fundamental  skills  for  kinesthetic  imagination,  awareness,  creative  problem  solving;  expands 
individual authentic movement vocabulary, develops spontaneous manipulation of time, space, and energy through various 
tasks and structures. Prerequisite: Dance major.   

DANC 181  Contact Improvisation I 

1 credit 

Discovery  and  cultivation  of  the  principles  and  skills  of  contact  improvisation  dance  technique  practice.  Contact 
improvisation  is  an  improvisational  duet  dance  form  based  on  sensation,  weight,  touch,  communication  and  essential 
connection between two people, influenced by modern dance, martial arts, social dance and cultural values of its time of 
inception. Prerequisite: Dance Major.   

DANC 205  Intermediate Tap 

1 credit 

This course offers students an in-depth exploration of adapting traditional tap steps for contemporary interpretations, 
focusing on their application in repertory performances. Emphasizing the intricate relationship between rhythm and music, 
students will engage in daily assessments that provide individualized feedback to enhance their skills and understanding. 
Students are encouraged to embrace their unique individuality and interpretations through the use of improvisation, and 
this work culminates in solo performances that showcase their artistic vision. 

DANC 224  History of Dance  

3 credits 

This course provides students a theoretical and historical basis for analyzing global dance practices from pre-history 
through the late 19th century. Undergraduate students will investigate how dance is categorized and performed in culturally 
specific settings such as theatrical dance, popular dance, ceremonies, and processions. This course introduces historical 
methodologies  including  text  analysis  and  primary  source  research  as  tools  to  understand  dance  knowledge  in  global 
contexts. 

289 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DANC 225  History of Dance II 
        This course covers the history of dance as a theatrical art form in Western culture form the early twentieth century to 
the present. The course is designed to explore significant historical movements and personalities and contemplate major 
themes and forces that have shaped the development of ballet, modern, jazz, and other relevant dance forms. Prerequisites: 
ENGL 101 

3 credits 

DANC 230, DANC 231  Production/Rehearsal/Performance III, IV 

      1 credit 

Continued  opportunities  to  learn  choreographic  works  in  rehearsals  for  performances  with  the  Playhouse  Dance 
Company.  A  continued  study  of  technical  preparation  for  productions  at  the  theatre.  Prerequisite:  DANC  131. 
Performance and/or crew will be included.  

DANC 236 Contemporary Partnering I 

1 credit  

This course offers students the opportunity to deepen their knowledge and skills in partnering one or more dancers. 
With  a  focus  on  basic  weight  sharing  and  weight  distribution  techniques,  engage  in  guided  improvisation  and  trust 
exercises.  By  the  end  of  the  course,  students  will  develop  an  understanding  of  the  intricacies  of  partnering  and  the 
importance of weight distribution while becoming equipped with tools for a safe and creative partnering future. 

DANC 237 Contemporary Partnering II 

1 credit  

This course is a continuation of DANC 236 Contemporary Partnering I. This advanced Contemporary Partnering 
Course is designed for students to continue building the skills acquired in the previously required course. Through learning 
more advanced partnering techniques, students will practice spontaneous problem-solving. Students will exchange their 
weight with other dancers through compromise and trust within their classroom community. Through research and physical 
exploration, students will choreograph partnering phrases. This process will include experimenting with free play inside 
improvisation while safely approaching physical risk within their physical research and guided structure of weight. 

DANC 280  Dance Composition I 

 2 credits 

An introduction to the fundamentals of dance making. The course develops strategies for movement invention and 

formal design elements. 

DANC 281  Dance Composition II 

 2 credits 

This  course  builds  on  skills  developed  in  Dance  Composition I with attention  toward  deepening  and  articulating 
individual point of view and enhanced conceptualization of compositional forms and design elements. Prerequisite: DANC 
280. 

DANC 300  Choreographic Theory and Practice 

 3 credits 

This course explores the art of choreography as artistic expression. Students will investigate choreographic devices and 
develop their individual choreographic voice through practical studio work and the study of major figures in the canon of 
Western  concert  dance.  Students  will  implement  intermediate  tools  for  movement  invention  and  assemble  structural 
elements in long form studies. Students will develop an understanding of how production elements such as music, lighting, 
and costumes support one’s choreographic vision. 

DANC 303  Dance and New Media 

 3 credits 

This course explores interactive possibilities between the live body and media as resources for creative expression and 
performance. Students will learn practical skills using current technology, with dance as the subject. Students will deepen 
individual  choreographic  practice  using  technology.  Possible  topics  include  introduction  to  dance  on  film,  use  of 
projections, and 3d mapping. 

DANC 355  Dance Aesthetics and Criticism                                                                            

3 credits 

This course empowers students to develop the skills necessary in the critical analysis of dance as an art form, and the 
understanding of the basic principles of art and aesthetics.   The course offers the exploration of diverse methodologies 
employed by master critics in analyzing dance, popular and emerging in the 21st century, and gives an in-depth look into 
the content and context of contemporary and historical choreographic bodies of work, the themes they explore, and the 
ways in which they relate to real life.  Emphasis will be placed on critical observation and writing skills. Prerequisite: DANC 
224 

DANC 365  Dance Pedagogy I 

 2 credits 

The theory and practice of teaching correct dance techniques in order to assess and train students from low levels 

through advanced levels in a logical, progressive, and responsible manner. 

290 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DANC 380  Composition III 

2 credits 

This  course  provides  students  with  a  forum  to  develop  choreographic  skills,  culminating  in  a  completed  work.  A 
journal will document the process, and a thesis will conclude the work process. The course also provides guidance and 
structure  for  hands-on  work  in  production/technical/promotional  preparation  that  is  essential  to  perform  the  work. 
Prerequisite:  DANC 281. 

DANC 381  Advanced Repertory 

2 credits 

This course offers third- or fourth-year students experience in learning and performing advanced dance repertory. A 
wide range of styles and creative approaches will provide students with a diverse palette of choreography that challenges 
students’ range and adaptability. Students will learn about each choreographer’s background, historical context, scope of 
work,  and  aesthetic  development.  Emphasis  is  placed  on  the  role  a  dancer  must  play  to  actualize  each  selected 
choreographer’s vision and concept. This class is an opportunity for students to experience how a professional company 
would  set,  generate,  rehearse  and  perform  repertory.  The  course  culminates  with  students  performing  the  work  for  an 
audience. 

This course will focus on works by the instructor or other artists. Material will be passed from director to dancer, 
learned from  scores, and video, and generated from task-based  exercises. Students will view a variety of works by these 
choreographers  in  order  to  contextualize  the  repertory,  and  written  assignments  will  be  given  to  further  students’ 
understanding of the artists and their works. 

DANC 480  Entrepreneurship and the Arts 

3 credits 

This course aims to equip students with the tools and skills needed to navigate the ever-evolving arts and culture sector. 
Delving  into  the  dynamic  relationships  between  art,  artist,  and  audience,  we  will  examine  essential  elements  such  as 
marketing and branding, business models, road maps and personal website building. Through fostering a collaborative and 
inclusive  learning  environment,  we  learn  through  discussions  and  explore  topics  with  guest  instructors  of  various 
backgrounds who have had success within the dance industry. By the end of this journey, students will develop strategies 
to actively approach and improve challenging career situations. Students will learn techniques for pursuing their chosen 
path in the dance field, and how to contribute to positive change in the art and culture ecosystems. 

DANC 481  Choreography Project 

2 credits 

Choreography Project is an independent study for advanced students. Students work with a faculty mentor to articulate 
and refine their individual aesthetics and artistic vision through choreographic work. Students will synthesize knowledge 
of structural forms and compositional craft to produce a work of dance. 

DIGI – ANIMATION 

DIGI 101   Fundamentals of Design for Animation  

3 credits 

The course examines the creation of modern day animation and visual effects and how these images, design paradigms, 
techniques were developed from historical imagery, painting and design.  Students will develop the aesthetics knowledge 
and skills necessary to be a successful designer for digital visual arts and new media. 

DIGI 102    Digital Design Tools and Techniques 

This course provides students with an overview of the tools used in Digital Media.  

DIGI 210    Fundamentals of Motion Graphics and Visual Effects   

3 credits 

3 credits 

This course provides a historical overview of the evolution of visual effects, as well as an introduction to the techniques 
of digital visual effects for film and video.  Students will be introduced to the seminal film works leading to the state of the 
contemporary visual effects work.  The will also learn the fundamental applications of visual effects developing storyboards 
and pre-visualizations and putting them into practice with class exercises. 

DIGI 220    Fundamentals of Animation   

 3 credits 

An introduction to general animation techniques, this course combines theoretical elements of film aesthetics with 
practical  experience  in  animation  filmmaking.  Students  are  exposed  to  all  types  of  animated  film  production  through 
lectures, film presentations, studio work and outside assignments. Class projects include: drawn animation, cell animation, 
stops motion, clay animation, rotoscoping and experimental techniques. This course is a prerequisite for all intermedia and 
advanced animation courses. Prerequisite: DIGI 102. 

291 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DIGI 225    Sound for Animation and Visual Effects 

3 credits 

This course teaches the foundations of film sound approaches and techniques as it applies to animation and visual 
effects audio post-production. It introduces students to sound theory, signal flow concepts, sound design methods, and the 
equipment used in production and post-production sound. Hands-on exercises will explore strategies, workflow, as well as 
the fundamentals of post-production processes such as sound editing, dialogue, clean-up, foley, ADR, and mixing. 

DIGI 230    Classical Animation 

3 credits 

Using  classical  2-D  technique,  this  course  focuses  on  creating  believable  movement  and  expression  in  animated 
characters.  Students  explore  the  history  of  classical  animation  screening  a  wide  range  of  commercial  and  experimental 
works. Students create short projects exploring various classical principles that can make any modern form of animation 
convincing.  This  course  will  also  develop  the  student’s  ability  to  rough,  block  and  animate  2-D  shots  in  sequence. 
Prerequisite: DIGI 220. 

DIGI 240    Introduction to 3D Animation 

3 credits 

This course is designed for students choosing a concentration in animation. It focuses on the introduction of 3D 

animation techniques, including 3D modeling, texturing, animating, lighting, and rendering. Prerequisite DIGI 220. 

DIGI 245   Visual Development for Animation 

 3 credits 

This course explores visual development for animation with concept art and storyboarding. Students create character 
designs,  learn  to  create  believable  and  atmospheric  environments,  as  well  as  props  and  vehicles.  It  introduces  the 
components of sequential art and explores visual narrative theories and techniques. They will develop the fundamental 
skills of design for time-based media beginning with basic conceptual scripting and storyboarding techniques. Prerequisite: 
DIGI 230. 

DIGI 305    History of Animation   

3 credits 

This course is a survey of the history of animation from its beginning to present day. Students will examine animators 
and studios from all over the world that helped to shape and influence the industry. Advances in technology and different 
methods and styles of animation will be discussed.  

Intermediate Motion Graphics 

DIGI 311 
       This  course  is  a  continuation  of  Fundamentals  of  Motion  Graphics.  The  course  focuses  on  creating  designs  and 
illustrations for motion graphics, then animating those elements in creative ways. Students will analyze and explore trends 
in  motion  graphics  design,  concepts,  composition,  and  animation styles  while  creating  complex  and  engaging  projects. 
Prerequisite DIGI 210. 

3 credits 

DIGI 315    3D Character Animation 
       In this course, students will continue to learn animation principles and practices related to 3D character animation. 
Through believable  motion  and  action,  students  will  create  3D  character  animation  with  the  use  of  observational  and 
timing skills, pantomime, body and force dynamics, action analysis, lip sync, and acting. Prerequisite: DIGI 230, DIGI 240.

3 credits 

DIGI 325   Character Animation & Analysis I 
        This course continues character animation and analysis. Students may complete character animation projects in either 
2D or 3D animation. The course emphasizes practicing and developing observational skills and then applying them to 
create believable character motion and acting. Prerequisite: DIGI 230, DIGI 240, DIGI 315. 

3 credits 

DIGI 330   Classical Animation II   

3 credits 

This is a course continuation of DIGI 230 Classical Animation. Students will continue to analyze and observe motion 
and apply those to 2-D characters and other projects they animate. Classical animation effects will also be introduced as 
well as further understanding of lip sync, physics, and believable acting and character personality. Prerequisite: DIGI 230. 

DIGI 335   Theory of Game Design   

3 credits 

In this hands-on workshop students learn techniques and approaches they can apply to understanding and designing 
games of any format -- from board games to digital games to real world games. Students analyze existing games to understand 
how they work as interactive systems; create a number of non-digital games in order to master the basic design principles as 
well as work on a series of exercises that explore the social, technological, and creative possibilities of games.  

DIGI 340   Concept Art   

3 credits 

This course develops students' ability to create effective concept art used in the pre-production phase of live action 
films, animation and video games. Students create character designs, learn to create believable and atmospheric landscape 

292 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
buildings  and  interiors,  as  well  as  designing  props  and  vehicles.  Students  work  in  both  traditional  and  Digital  media. 
Prerequisites: DIGI 245. 

DIGI 345   Comics and Storyboarding   

3 credits 

This course explores the art of cartooning and storyboarding. It introducing the components of sequential art, and 
explores visual narrative theories and techniques. Students focus on observational and interpretive drawing skills and apply 
them to visual storytelling. Students break down ideas and scenes sequentially to promote compelling narrative. Students 
will learn how characters are constructed and integrated into graphic composition, and use a hands-on approach to increase 
their  knowledge  of  how  these  skills  apply  to  comic  book,  animation  and  motion  picture  fields.  The  will  develop  the 
fundamental skills of design for time-based media beginning with basic conceptual scripting and storyboarding techniques 
and ending with the creation of an "animatics" prototype. The art of visual storytelling is explored from both abstract and 
representational  points  of  view,  with  applications  ranging  from  comic  books  to  cinema  and  character  animation. 
Prerequisites: DIGI 245. 

DIGI 350  Community Animation Project   

3 credits 

In  this  workshop  course,  students  will  work  in  teams,  developing  an  animation  or  visual  effects  based  narrative 
project.  They will develop a script creating storyboards and pre-visualizations.  Each production team will assume specific 
roles in completing the final project. Prerequisites: DIGI 210, DIGI 230, DIGI 240. 

DIGI 354  Project in Stop Motion   

3 credits 

This course provides a structure for learning the major principles of stop motion animation. Students will explore a 
range of techniques developing how to create puppets, armatures and sets for physical animation. Core visual skills such as 
sculpture, life drawing and materials development are integral to the course as well as the technical expertise execute stop 
motion projects.  Students will work on a number of projects/ exercises throughout the semester.  Prerequisite: DIGI 250. 

DIGI 370  Unreal for Animators I   

3 credits 

This course provides animators with a fundamental understanding of Unreal Engine, a powerful real-time 3D creation 
platform widely used in the entertainment industry. Students will learn how to leverage Unreal Engine's capabilities to 
enhance their animation and filmmaking capabilities.  Prerequisite: DIGI 240. 

DIGI 399  Animation and Visual Effects Practicum 
        This course allows students to gain practical, hands-on experience by acting as creative work/research assistants on 
projects being done by Animation and Visual effects faculty members or Point Park faculty members in other departments. 
The nature and scope of the work will be agreed upon by the student and faculty member, and approved by the Cinema 
Arts department. The goal of the practicum is to allow the student to broaden their knowledge on a particular subject, and 
to  give  them  experience  performing  work  at  a  professional  level  as  well  as  meeting  the  deadlines  given  by  their  faculty 
supervisor. An additional opportunity for practicum credit is to work on an advanced cinema arts production in a capacity 
not  being  filled  by a  student  that  is  completing  that  project  for  credit.  Students  seeking  approval  for  a  student  project 
practicum would be required to arrange to be supervised by an animation and visual effects faculty member. A 3-credit 
cinema student practicum requires generally 150 hours of work, however credits per hour would vary depending on the 
nature of the project. 

1-3 credits 

DIGI 410  Advanced Visual Effects   

3 credits 

In  this  course,  students  will  learn  advanced  3D  visual  effect/motion  graphic  techniques  including  advanced 

compositing techniques, rotoscoping, advanced motion tracking, matte paintings, digital set extensions.  

DIGI 420  Advanced Computer Animation   

3 credits 

In this course, students will learn advanced 3D animation techniques including 3D environments, 3D lighting, 3D 

textures and advanced character development. Prerequisite: DIGI 315. 

DIGI 425  Character Animation and Analysis II                                                                     
       This course is a continuation of DIGI425 Character Animation and Analysis I. Students will continue to analyze and 
observation motion and apply those to characters they animate in either 2D or 3D animation. Students will work towards 
a character animation demo reel of industry quality work. Prerequisite: DIGI 325 

3 credits 

DIGI 430   Advanced Motion Graphics 

3 credits 

This course is a continuation of Fundamentals of Motion Graphics and Visual Effects. It covers further understanding 
of  motion  graphics  animation  and  design  techniques  and  principles,  compositing,  2D  character  animation,  and 
introduction of 3D animation related to the field of motion graphics. Prerequisite: DIGI 311. 

293 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DIGI 451    Senior Thesis – Part I   

3 credits 

In  this  course,  students  will  begin  their  thesis  project  based  upon  their  area  of  concentration.  Collaboration, 
preapproved by the advising instructor, is encouraged. The project will be an animated, motion-graphic or visual effect-
based work that synthesizes the techniques learned in the first three years of the program. This first phase of the thesis 
project involves the conceptualization and pre-visualization of the work as well as the initial stages of production. Student 
may also elect to work on a demo reel or visual development portfolio of equivalent scope. 

DIGI 452  Senior Thesis – Part II   

3 credits 

This  course  is  a  continuation  of  DIGI  451.    Students  continue  in  the  production  of  their  thesis  project  through 
completion.    The  final  work  will  demonstrate  a  high  level  of  proficiency  in  their  area  of  concentration  as  well  as  an 
understanding of all of the processes of creating professional digital media work. Prerequisite: DIGI 451 

DIGI 460    Animation and Visual Effects Capstone 

3 credits 

This Capstone course is designed to demonstrate a student’s accumulated knowledge and training of the learning 
objectives in the Animation and Visual Effects Program. Students will analyze films, sequences, breakdowns, and other 
works in Animation and Visual Effects production that focus on post-graduation interests. Students will also finalize their 
individual professional portfolios, which include a resume, cover letter, demo reel, and web presence. Prerequisite: Senior 
Standing.  

DIGI 470   Unreal for Animators II 

3 credits 

Building on the foundation of the Unreal Engine for Animators I course, this advanced class delves deeper into the 
world  of  virtual  production,  targeting  animation  filmmaking  and  how  to  master  cutting  edge  techniques  with  Unreal 
Engine. Prerequisite: DIGI 370. 

DIG 194, DIGI 294        Special Topics                                                               

DIGI 495  Special Topics in Digital Arts  

DIGI 498    Internship 

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

3 credits 

Internships  are  intended  to  be  substantive  learning  experiences  that  help  to  prepare  the  student  for  his/her 
professional career. Internship assignments must have written approval of both the student’s advisor and the department 
chair.  Prerequisite: students are eligible for an internship after completion of their sophomore year.   

DIGI 499   Independent Study  

1-6 credits 

An independent study provides students with the opportunity to enrich the learning experience by allowing them to 
focus their attention on a particular area in their field of study.  Students can request an independent study of one to six 
credits if a comparable course is not available on campus or through another institution of higher education. Prerequisites: 
a junior or senior class standing and a 3.0 Q.P.A. are required to register for an independent study. 

ECON – ECONOMICS 

ECON 201  Principles of Economics/Macroeconomics 

3 credits 

This course provides the foundational principles for the understanding how an economy operates domestically and 
interacts with the rest of the world, considering the current high level of economic interdependency among countries due 
to globalization. Moreover, students will gain a critical knowledge and analytical tools of economics as applied by private 
consumers  and  investors,  and  by  governments  using  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  Essential  topics  to  be  dis-cussed  and 
analyzed  include  determinants  of  total  production,  employment  and  inflation,  equilibrium  in  an  open  economy, 
government policies to promote economic growth and recovery from recessions, and the main economic challenges of the 
world economy, including the significant differences in economic development. 

ECON 202  Principles of Economics/Microeconomics   

3 credits 

This  course  provides  the  foundational  principles  for  economic  transactions  and  determination  of  prices  in  the 
marketplace. It delivers key economic insights for an individual or organization's ability to financially succeed in a world 
that is becoming more integrated and competitive every day. Moreover, this course discusses the demand and supply models 
for a variety of market structures ranging from perfectly competitive markets to monopolies and oligopolies. The role of 
government in the marketplace is also examined. The above impact both national and international markets, such as the 

294 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
world oil market and other markets for natural resources, goods, and services that are of great importance to our country 
and the world. 

ECON 203  Economic History of the United States 

3 credits 

A study of the evolutionary development of the United States from the colonial subsistence level to the present day. 

ECON 205  Survey of Economic Thought 

3 credits 

This course will introduce students to the ideas of major figures from antiquity to the present times and explore the 
reasons  such  ideas  revolutionized  the  field  of  economics.    Moreover,  the  major  schools  of  economic  setting  will  be 
examined.  Prerequisites:  ECON 201, ECON 202. 

ECON 306  Economics of Money and Banking 

3 credits 

The functioning of our monetary and banking system and the possible effects of monetary policy on the economy. 
Examines the ways domestic monetary policies affect global financial markets and international monetary arrangements. 
Prerequisite:  ECON 201 or ECON 202. 

ECON 310  Intermediate Price Theory 

3 credits  

An insight into the determination of prices and quantities under various types of market conditions. Prerequisite:  

ECON 202. 

ECON 350  ECON Internship I 

3 credits  

ECON Internship I provides students with hands-on experience in the economics and finance profession. Students 
gain practical experience, enhance skills learned in the classroom, and acquire contacts with professionals in the field. This 
course requires students to complete 150 hours in the field, be evaluated by their supervisor and prepare a report. Students 
must be approved prior to beginning their internship and should have a GPA of 3.0 or higher. Dual listed as FIN 350 FIN 
Internship I. Prerequisite: Economics and Finance major with approval. 

ECON 380  ECON Cooperative Education I 

3 credits  

ECON Cooperative Education I provides students with hands on experience in the economics and finance profession. 
Students gain practical experience, enhance skills learned in the classroom, and acquire contacts with professionals in the 
field.  This  course  requires  the  student  to  complete  480  hours  in  the  field,  be  evaluated  by  an  on-site  supervisor  and 
supervising faculty member, and prepare a comprehensive written report. Students must be approved prior to beginning 
their co-op and should have a GPA or higher. This is a Pass/Fail course. Dual listed as FIN 380 Cooperative Education I. 
Prerequisites: FIN 306 and permission from instructor. 

ECON 405  Comparative Economic Systems 

3 credits 

This  class  provides  a  comparative  and  contrasting  perspective  of  different  economic  systems.    It  explores  the  way 
economies function under the umbrella of different philosophies, institutions and processes.  Prerequisites:  ECON 201, 
ECON 202. 

ECON 417  Economic Growth and Development 

 3 credits 

An analysis of theories of economic growth and development will be presented here. An attempt  will be made to 
explore the dynamics of various countries at different stages of development so as to determine effective and efficient ways 
that  may  contribute  to  more  advanced  rates  of  growth  especially  for  the  lesser  developed  and  developing  countries. 
Prerequisites:  ECON 201, ECON 202, ECON 310. 

ECON 418  Modern Economic Thought 

3 credits 

This is a more advanced, more thorough and more analytical approach to the ECON 205-Survey of Economic Thought 
class.  The fundamental ideas of the major schools of economic thought will be examined so as to determine their impacts 
on  economic  policies,  Austrian,  Marxist,  Keynesian,  Neo-Classical  and  Institutional  perspectives  will  be  analyzed 
systematically.    Policy  discussions  and  applications  of  these  economic  ideas  will  be  pursued  in  the  current  economic 
environment.  Prerequisites:  ECON 201, ECON 202,ECON  205. 

ECON 419  Economics of Social Issues 

3 credits 

The  course  explores  social  issues  such  as  poverty,  government  controls,  crime,  pollution,  education,  market 
imperfections and their impact on the economy.  A policy approach will be used to see how the impacts of problems can 
be minimized or solved so as to enhance social and individual wellbeing.  Prerequisites:  ECON 201, ECON 202.          

295 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
ECON 421  International Economics 

3 credits 

A study of international trade covering topics such as absolute and comparative costs, factor movements, balance of 
payments,  barriers  of  trade,  the  impact  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations  on  trade  and  multinational  corporate  issues. 
Prerequisite:  ECON 201 or ECON 202. 

ECON 431  International Finance 

3 credits 

This  class  examines  aspects  of  the  international  financial  arena.    It  explores  systematically  the  ways  corporations 
function in the international financial setting.  It examines the role international financial institutions and the significance 
of exchange rate fluctuations in corporate behavior and performance.  Prerequisites:  ECON 201, ECON 202. 

ECON 460  ECON Internship II 

3 credits 

The second ECON Internship course provides students with enhanced hands-on experience in the economics and 
finance profession. Students gain practical experience, enhance skills learned in the classroom, and acquire contacts with 
professionals in the field. This course requires students to complete 150 hours in the field, be evaluated by their supervisor 
and prepare a report. Students must be approved prior to beginning their internship and should have a GPA or 3.0 or 
higher. This is a Pass/Fail. Dual listed as FIN 460 FIN Internship II. Prerequisite: ECON 350 and Economics and Finance 
major with approval. 

ECON 462  ECON Internship III 

3 credits 

The  third  ECON  Internship  course  provides  students  with  enhanced  hands-on  experience  in  the  economics  and 
finance profession. Students continue to gain practical experience, enhance additional skills learned in the classroom, and 
acquire more extensive contacts with professionals in the field. This course requires students to complete 150 hours in the 
field, be evaluated by their supervisor and prepare a report. Students must be approved prior to beginning their internship 
and should have a GPA of 3.0 or higher. The is a Pass/Fail course. Dual listed as FIN 461 FIN Internship III. Prerequisite: 
ECON 460 and Economics and Finance major with approval. 

ECON 480  ECON Cooperative Education II 

3 credits  

The second ECON Cooperative Education provides students with enhanced hands-on experience in the economics 
and finance profession. Students gain practical experience, enhance skills learned in the classroom, and acquire contacts 
with professionals in the field. This course requires the student to complete 480 hours in the field, be evaluated by an on-
site supervising faculty member, and prepare a comprehensive written report. Students must be approved prior to beginning 
their  co-op  and  should  have  a  GPA  of  3.0  or  higher.  This  is  a  Pass/Fail  Course.  Dual  listed  as  FIN  480  Cooperative 
Education II. Prerequisites: ECON 380 and permission from instructor. 

ECON 194, ECON 294 Selected Topics   

ECON 295, ECON 395, ECON 495   Special Topics in Economics I, II, III  

ECON 296, ECON 396, ECON 496  
Independent Study in Economics I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

Special topics in economics have included: Forensic Economics, Economics of Investment, Economics and the Law, 

Current Economic Issues, Practical Economics in the Workplace. 

EDUC – EDUCATION 

Current clearances (PA Criminal Clearance, PA Child Abuse Clearance, FBI Criminal Record Check) must be on file 

in the University’s School of Education Office. 

EDUC 101 Technological Literacy for Education for the 21st Century 

3 credits 

This course is designed to be a hands-on, interactive technology course that will allow students to use technology that 
is  found  in  our  global  society  and  to  improve  their  future  professional  practice.    Through  group  projects,  individual 
presentations, and an e-portfolio, students will learn how technology can increase collaboration, communication, creativity 
and divergent thinking.  Students will locate and use content-related technology resources. 

EDUC 105 CTE Introduction to Teaching 

3 credits 

This course is an overview course for the Career Technical Teaching program in which students are introduced to the 
philosophy for preparing highly effective teachers. Students will begin to identify components of state standards, evidence-

296 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
based curriculum, classroom materials and teaching resources.   This introductory course will also review general education 
topics and provide an overview of the history and current trends in vocational education. 

EDUC 106 CTE Classroom Management 

3 credits 

This course is designed to equip educators with the skills and knowledge necessary to effectively manage Career and 
Technical Education (CTE) classrooms. Focused on fostering a productive and engaging learning environment, the course 
covers a wide range of strategies and best practices tailored to the unique challenges of CTE settings, including psychological 
and development needs of adolescent learners. Participants will explore techniques for creating a positive classroom culture, 
managing  student  behavior,  organizing  classroom  spaces,  and  integrating  technology.  Special  attention  will  be  given  to 
promoting safety, inclusivity, and collaboration within diverse learning environments. 

EDUC 107 CTE Differentiated Instructional Methods 

3 credits 

This  course  focuses  on  effective  differentiated  instruction  in  Career  and  Technical  Education  (CTE)  classrooms. 
Emphasizing the emotional and intellectual characteristics of young adults, the course covers key strategies for adapting and 
implementing instructional methods to meet the diverse needs of learners. Participants will learn to modify instructional 
resources and develop inclusive teaching practices that promote success for all students in CTE settings. 

EDUC 108 CTE Assessment Strategies 

3 credits 

This  course  will  develop  and  refine  student’s  abilities  to  plan  and  modify  instruction  in  Career  and  Technical 
Education (CTE) classrooms based on the assessment components in a standards-aligned system. Students will learn to use 
multiple sources of data for decision-making and monitoring students’ growth and development. With an emphasis on the 
fundamentals  of  measurement,  the  course  covers  both  formal  and  informal  assessment  methods,  identification  of 
appropriate  materials  for  vocational  education,  and  techniques  for  adjusting  instruction  based  on  assessment  data. 
Participants will also learn how to provide meaningful and effective feedback to support student learning and achievement. 

EDUC 109 CTE Instructional Planning 

3 credits 

This  course  focuses  on  comprehensive  instructional  planning  in  Career  and  Technical  Education  (CTE)  settings. 
Emphasizing the integration of general and vocational curriculum approaches, the course covers essential topics such as 
alignment with Pennsylvania Academic Standards, effective communication, and collaboration with colleagues. Participants 
will learn to develop comprehensive instructional plans that promote student success and prepare them for career and 
technical pathways. 

EDUC 110 CTE Content Literacy 

3 credits 

This course is designed to provide educators with the knowledge and skills needed to enhance content literacy in 
Career and Technical Education (CTE) classrooms. Focusing on the integration of strategies within technical instruction, 
the  course  covers  key  areas  such  as  production  skills,  principles  of  technology,  risk  management,  financing,  product 
planning, technology utilization, and state standards.  The course will also provide an overview of professional organizations, 
literature, and student organizations. Participants will learn to develop and implement effective instructional strategies that 
promote student understanding and application of technical content, preparing them for successful careers in vocational 
education. 

EDUC 150  Introductions to the Teaching Profession 

3 credits 

This course is an overview course in which students are introduced to the philosophy for preparing highly effective 
Pennsylvania teachers.  At the beginning of the semester students will obtain all clearances as required by the Pennsylvania 
Department  of  Education,  so  that  by  the  end  of  the  semester,  students  are  able  to  begin  their  required  observation 
experiences.  During the semester students will begin to understand how the components of: instruction, state standards, 
standards-based curriculum, materials and resources for instruction and appropriate interventions all lead to highly effective 
classroom instruction. 

EDUC 200 CTE Learners with Diverse Needs 

3 credits 

This course examines effective strategies and best practices for supporting learners with diverse needs in Career and 
Technical Education (CTE) environments, with a particular emphasis on English Language Learners (ELLs). Participants 
will explore the intersection of cultural, linguistic, and academic diversity in CTE classrooms and develop the skills necessary 
to  create  inclusive,  equitable,  and  responsive  learning  environments.  The  course  emphasizes  the  use  of  differentiated 
instruction,  culturally  relevant  teaching  practices,  and  targeted  accommodations  to  overcome  language  barriers,  foster 
student  engagement,  and  promote  both  academic  and  technical  skill  development  for  ELLs.  Additionally,  the  course 
highlights the importance of collaboration with families, communities, and support staff to ensure the success of all learners, 
fostering a holistic approach to student achievement. 

297 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EDUC 201 CTE Student Wellness and Resilience 

3 credits 

This course focuses on fostering wellness and resilience among students in Career and Technical Education (CTE) 
programs through a trauma-informed lens. Participants will examine the physical, emotional, and social challenges students 
often encounter, including the impact of trauma and long-lasting mental health symptoms. The course will explore how 
mental  health  influences  learning  and  provide  strategies  to  recognize  signs  of  distress  while  implementing  supportive 
practices.  Emphasis  will  be  placed  on  the  critical  role  educators  play  in  creating  safe,  supportive,  and  mentally  healthy 
learning  environments.  Participants  will  learn  to  integrate  Social-Emotional  Learning  (SEL)  activities,  trauma-informed 
strategies,  and  educator  self-care  practices  to  sustain  their  own  well-being.  By  the  end  of  the  course,  educators  will  be 
equipped  to  lead  wellness  initiatives,  collaborate  with  families  and  community  resources,  and  empower  students  with 
essential coping mechanisms, self-advocacy skills, and a growth mindset for personal and professional success. 

EDUC 205 CTE Math for Educators 

3 credits 

This  course  empowers  Career  and  Technical  Education  (CTE)  educators  with  the  knowledge  and  strategies  to 
seamlessly integrate mathematical concepts into their technical curricula. Participants will explore the vital connections 
between CTE disciplines and foundational math principles, with a focus on practical, real-world applications. Key topics 
include identifying essential math skills for various CTE fields, designing lessons that align with both academic standards 
and industry needs, and using hands-on activities to enhance student understanding. The course aims to build educators' 
confidence in teaching math within a technical context, promote interdisciplinary learning, and help students master the 
math skills required for career readiness and technical proficiency. By the end of the course, participants will be equipped 
to create engaging, math-infused instructional experiences that bridge the gap between academic and technical learning, 
preparing students for success in the workforce. 

EDUC 206 CTE Inquiry Based Learning 

3 credits 

This course delves into the principles and practices of inquiry-based learning within Career and Technical Education 
(CTE), with a particular emphasis on integrating STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) concepts. 
Participants will explore strategies to foster curiosity, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills through engaging, student-
centered,  hands-on  learning  experiences.  Key  topics  include  designing  inquiry-driven  projects,  incorporating  STEM 
principles into CTE pathways, and utilizing real-world problems to inspire meaningful exploration and innovation. The 
course also emphasizes aligning inquiry-based approaches with industry standards and career readiness goals, ensuring that 
students are equipped to apply STEM knowledge and skills in both technical and professional contexts. By the end of the 
course, participants will be able to create dynamic learning environments that promote active inquiry and prepare students 
for success in their careers. 

EDUC 207 CTE Psychology of Learners 

3 credits 

This course explores psychological principles and theories essential for supporting learners in Career and Technical 
Education  (CTE),  with  a  focus  on  students  with  disabilities.  Participants  will  examine  motivation,  cognitive  skill 
development, learning preferences, and the impact of social-emotional factors on student performance. Special emphasis is 
placed on implementing positive behavioral interventions, utilizing diagnostic, formative, and summative assessments, and 
applying  evaluation  data  to  develop  and  implement  Individualized  Education  Programs  (IEPs).  The  course  also  covers 
literacy development and instruction in both core and intervention areas, equipping educators with strategies to enhance 
reading and comprehension skills. Educators will learn to create inclusive, engaging learning environments that foster self-
efficacy, resilience, and a growth mindset, preparing students for academic success and career readiness. 

EDUC 208 CTE Composition and Communication 

3 credits 

This course is designed to enhance the writing and communication skills critical for success in Career and Technical 
Education  (CTE)  fields.  Participants  will  explore  effective  strategies  for  teaching  technical  writing,  professional 
correspondence, and industry-specific documentation to strengthen students' career readiness. Key topics include crafting 
clear  and  impactful  resumes,  reports,  and  presentations,  as  well  as  developing  communication  skills  essential  for 
collaborative  and  professional  settings.  The  course  emphasizes  aligning  writing  instruction  with  industry  standards  and 
technical requirements, ensuring that students are equipped to communicate confidently and effectively in the workplace. 
By the end of the course, participants will be prepared to support students in mastering the communication skills needed 
to thrive in their careers. 

EDUC 209 CTE Technological Applications and Trends 

3 credits 

This course explores current and emerging technological innovations in Career and Technical Education (CTE), with 
a primary focus on integrating artificial intelligence (AI) tools to transform teaching and learning. Participants will examine 
trends in educational technology, critically evaluate AI-powered tools for instructional and administrative purposes and 
develop strategies to prepare students for the dynamic demands of a rapidly evolving workforce. Key topics include utilizing 
AI  to  personalize  learning  experiences,  enhance  student  engagement,  streamline  assessments,  and  build  technical 

298 

 
 
 
 
 
 
proficiency with industry-relevant tools. The course also emphasizes ethical considerations, promoting equitable access to 
technology, and empowering educators to guide students in the responsible and informed use of AI. By the end of the 
course, participants will be equipped to leverage AI and other emerging technologies to enrich CTE programs and support 
student success in both academic and professional contexts. 

EDUC 210  Introduction to Teaching in the Residency Program 

3 credits 

This course is an overview course for the Residency Program in which students are introduced to the philosophy for 
preparing  highly  effective  teachers.  Students  will  begin  to  identify  components  of  state  standards,  evidence-based 
curriculum,  classroom  materials  and  teaching  resources  for  purposeful  lesson  planning,  building  a  positive  classroom 
environment, instructional delivery and demonstrating professionalism. 

EDUC 211 CTE Curriculum Design and Implementation 

3 credits 

This course explores advanced strategies for curriculum development in career and technical education. Emphasis is 
placed on aligning curricula with industry standards, integrating technology, and creating interdisciplinary connections. 
Teachers will learn to design comprehensive CTE programs that meet the diverse needs of students while adhering to state 
and national standards. 

EDUC 212 CTE Program Evaluation and Improvement 

3 credits 

This course provides teachers with the tools and methodologies needed to evaluate the effectiveness of their CTE 
programs. Topics include program review processes, stakeholder feedback, continuous improvement models, and the use 
of data to make informed decisions about program enhancements. 

EDUC 213 CTE Industry Partnerships 

3 credits 

This course focuses on developing and maintaining strong partnerships with industry and creating meaningful work-
based learning opportunities for students. Teachers will learn how to coordinate internships, apprenticeships, and industry 
collaborations that provide real-world experience and enhance student employability. 

EDUC 214 CTE Leadership and Advocacy 

3 credits 

This  course  prepares  CTE  teachers  to  take  on  leadership  roles  within  their  schools  and  districts.  Topics  include 
instructional  leadership,  advocacy  for  CTE  programs,  collaboration  with  industry  partners,  and  the  development  of 
professional learning communities. 

EDUC 215 CTE Legal and Ethical Issues 

3 credits 

This course covers the legal and ethical considerations specific to CTE, including compliance with labor laws, safety 
regulations,  and  ethical  dilemmas  in  vocational  education.  Teachers  will  learn  how  to  navigate  these  issues  while 
maintaining a safe and equitable learning environment. 

EDUC 216 CTE Professional Teaching Practicum 

6 credits 

This course encourages CTE teachers to engage in ongoing professional development and lifelong learning. Topics 
include identifying professional growth opportunities, participating in professional organizations, and staying current with 
industry trends and educational research. 

EDUC 220  Family and Community Diversity 

3 credits 

This  course  will  provide  teacher  candidates  with  methods  and  strategies  for  creating  a  positive,  inclusive  learning 
environment that addresses the various cognitive, affective and developmental needs of diverse learners.  Cultural, racial, 
and ethnic issues will be explored as they relate to the needs of school aged students.  Students will review strategies for 
building positive relationships with diverse families and communities and learn how to develop working relationships with 
key  community  organizations  related  to  cultural  diversity  to  enhance  children’s  educational  outcomes.    Prerequisite:   
EDUC 150. 

EDUC 222  Assessment and Adaptation 

3 credits 

This course focuses on the development of children through the selection and use of formal and informal assessment 
and development of the student’s observational skills of diverse academic levels, including children  with special needs.  
Special emphasis is placed on authentic assessment, lesson planning and related standards as outlined by the Pennsylvania 
Department of Education Academic Standards.  Classroom observations are required.  Prerequisite:  HUMA 150 or EDUC 
150. 

EDUC 228  Educational Psychology 

 3 credits 

This course will assist students in better understanding the role that psychological and educational theories play in 

299 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
understanding human learning and human behavior. Prime emphasis will be placed on the role that psychological processes 
such as cognitive development, individual and group differences, motivation, psycho-social development and metacognition 
play  in  the  functioning  of  humans  in  everyday  settings  and  circumstances.  Each  student  will  be  challenged  to  make 
connections between the various  psychological theories studied in  this course and their own personal and professional 
interests. As such, an interdisciplinary approach to educational psychology will be utilized. 

EDUC 250  Working with English Language Learners 

3 credits 

This course is designed to introduce the special considerations for working with English Language Learners given their 
unique cultural, linguistic, instructional and assessment needs.  An understanding of who these students are, how to provide 
appropriate interventions for them and an in-depth look at the Pennsylvania ELL Standards correlation to other content 
areas will be included.  The study will focus on linking research to practice and provide information that will be useful for 
working with this special population as the fastest growing student group in US schools. 

EDUC 251  Arts and Music in Teaching 

3 credits 

In this course, students will be able to articulate priorities for high quality, meaningful arts experiences across a human 
development continuum.  Emphasis will be on integrated arts approach utilizing the Literary Arts (Literature and Poetry), 
Music (Instruments and Singing), Drama and Storytelling, Dance and Creative Movement, Visual Arts, and Eurhythmics.  
Special attention will be given to the arts supporting physical, affective, and cognitive development. This course is designed 
to provide students with a variety of learning experiences including, but not limited to:  lecture, group discussions and 
projects, artist presentations, article reviews, and experiential learning experiences such as direct exposure to varied arts 
media, observations, museum and school visits.  

EDUC 252  Children’s Literature  

 3 credits 

The course emphasizes human communications and creative techniques for developing the skills of speaking, listening, 
reading, and writing. Special attention is given to such areas as creative storytelling, sequence of language development, 
language stimulation, mass media, dramatic interpretation, applied and performing arts and poetry. Students in this course 
will read a variety of classic and contemporary children's literature. These genres will include traditional literature (folktales, 
fables, fairy tales, myths, legends), novels, picture books, modern fantasy, poetry, contemporary realistic fiction, historical 
fiction, biographies, and informational books.  

EDUC 302  Reading Methods I 

3 credits 

This is the first of two courses that is designed to develop competencies necessary to understand and foster emergent 
literacy and language arts skills in Pre-K through Grade 2.  Special attention is given to such areas as sequence of language 
development,  language  stimulation,  and  the  components  of  reading.    Topics  covered  emphasize  the  development  of 
meaningful language and literacy experiences using a variety of text and other media that support integrating reading and 
writing, content area learning, vocabulary development, and reading comprehension for the diverse needs and abilities of 
students.  Observations and field experiences are required.   Prerequisite:  Current Clearances, EDUC 150, EDUC 222, 
and EDUC 252. 

EDUC 303  Reading Methods II 

3 credits 

This is the second of two courses that is designed to develop competencies necessary to understand and foster emergent 
literacy and language arts skills in Grades 3 through 5.  Special attention is given to such areas as phonemic awareness, 
phonics, vocabulary, comprehension, and fluency.  Topics covered emphasize the development of meaningful language and 
literacy  experiences  using  a  variety  of  text  and  other  media  that  support  integrating  reading  and  writing,  content  area 
learning, vocabulary development, and reading comprehension for the diverse needs and abilities of students.  Practical 
application of researched theories and methodologies through observation and field experiences are required.  Prerequisite:  
Approved Application to the School of Education and EDUC 302.  

EDUC 305  Methods of Mathematics I 

3 credits 

This course provides teacher candidates with methods and current strategies in teaching mathematics in preschool 
through Grade 2.  The candidates will recognize constructivist theories, as well as informal and formal methodologies and 
assessments.  Students will demonstrate their ability to prepare, select and use materials and instructional approaches to 
construct unit plans and demonstration lessons.  Field placement activities are required.  Prerequisite:  Current Clearances, 
EDUC 150, EDUC 222, and at least 3 credits of Math. 

EDUC 308  Teaching Social Studies 

3 credits 

Innovative techniques for an interdisciplinary approach to the teaching of social sciences will be addressed in this 
course.  Special attention is given to anti-biased curriculum.  Presentation through developmentally appropriate materials 
and resources is examined.  A six-session guided field experience is an integral part of this course.  Prerequisites:  Approved 

300 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application to the School of Education and HIST 382 and POLS 102. 

EDUC 310  Teaching Science and Health 

3 credits 

This course provides teacher candidates with methods and current strategies in teaching science and health for school 
aged children.  Students will demonstrate their ability to prepare, select and use materials and instructional approaches 
appropriate  to  diverse  needs  and  abilities  of  students.    Unit  plans,  demonstrations  and  field  placement  activities  are 
required.  The course will also connect students to the professional community of science education professionals and 
resources.  Prerequisites:  NSET 110, NSET 111 and Approved Application to the School of Education. 

EDUC 315  Methods of Mathematics II 

 3 credits 

This course is a continuation of EDUC 305 – Methods of Mathematics I.   It will focus on content as well as pedagogy 
appropriate for children in Grades 3 through 6.  The candidates will review their own mathematics skills while researching, 
preparing unit plans and demonstration lessons.  These activities will be developed in accordance to the National Council 
of Teachers of Mathematics as well as Pennsylvania State Standards.  Emphasis will be placed on connections within the 
subject of mathematics, among other academic areas as well as real life situations.  Field placement activities are required. 
Prerequisites: Approved Application to the School of Education. 

EDUC 317 Methods of Teaching Dance 
      Teaching  Dance  Methods  PreK-12  is  designed  for  preparing  undergraduate  students  to  teach  dance  education. 
Students will learn a conceptual and comprehensive model of dance education that embraces dance as an art form and a 
lifelong physical activity. Students will gain the tools they need to teach various dance forms, create effective lesson and 
unit  plans,  and  develop  a  curriculum  that  meets  arts  and  education  standards.  Integrating  the  theories  of  multiple 
intelligences with learning styles, students will learn a variety of techniques to be able to differentiate instruction to meet 
the needs of PK-grade 12 students. Students will utilize the Charlotte Danielson Framework for Teaching to best design 
their lessons. 

  3 credits 

EDUC 321 Literacy and Learning in Middle and Secondary School 

3 credits 

Designed to integrate reading as part of any content area. Provides all secondary teachers with skills necessary to teach 

reading comprehension and to identify reading problems. Prerequisite: Approved application to School of Education. 

EDUC 330  Educational Theories and Practices 

3 credits 

This course will introduce the student to the diverse philosophical models and learning theories of early education 
such as Montessori, Reggio, High Scope and Waldorf.  Attention is given to enriching the curriculum with the best of 
current practices.  Practical application of researched theories and methodologies through observation and field experiences 
are included.   Prerequisite:  Approved Application to the School of Education. 

EDUC 335  Program Development, Leadership, and Organizational Change 

3 credits 

This  course  will  provide  an  in-depth  review  of  the  organizational  structure,  regulations  and  professional  society 
expectations.    Special  attention  is  given  to  analyzing  and  applying  skills  that  demonstrate  effective  leadership  and 
appropriate advocacy within the field of early education.  Developmentally appropriate practice is emphasized through the 
examination of state and federal early childhood programs such as:  Keystone STARS, Head Start, Even Start, Child Care, 
and Pre-K Counts.  Prerequisites:  Approved Application to the School of Education. 

EDUC 401  Differentiated Reading for the Developing Child 

3 credits 

This  course  will  develop  competencies  necessary  for  the  teaching  of  reading  in  Pre-K  through  Grade  5.    Various 
approaches and strategies for teaching reading, language arts, and the writing process are reviewed, analyzed, and evaluated.  
Grade-appropriate units and supporting lessons are created.  Practical application of researched theories and methodologies 
through a guided pre-student teaching field experience is required.   Prerequisites:  Approved Application to the School of 
Education. 

EDUC 411  Integrating Curriculum and Instruction  

3 credits 

This course will focus on the planning, creation and adaptation of a developmentally supportive learning environment 
with  special  attention  given  to  the  interaction  of  curriculum,  teaching  practices,  learning  materials  and  the  learning 
environment.  Emphasis is placed on creating and adapting integrated developmentally appropriate experiences for the 
developing child as defined by the National Association for the Education of Young Children.  Guided pre-student teaching 
experiences are an integral part of this course.  Prerequisites:  Approved Application to the School of Education. 

EDUC 415  Teaching in Secondary School 

3 credits 

Methods and current practices in the teaching of mathematics, science, social sciences, and English/communications 

301 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to address classroom settings.  Lesson planning, unit development, and viable presentations of interactive lessons, including 
authentic assessment tools for the specific content area.  Emphasizes classroom management, special needs students, and 
daily teaching strategies. Field experiences are to be completed in a secondary setting, where teaching of a specific content 
can be observed.  Prerequisite: Approved application to Education Department; for students who will be student teaching 
in the next semester.  

EDUC 422  Data Driven Instruction 

 3 credits 

This  course  will  develop  and  refine  students’  abilities  to  plan  and  modify  instruction  based  on  the  assessment 
components in a standards-aligned system.  Students will learn to use multiple sources of data for decision-making and 
monitoring students’ growth and development.  Students will develop proficiency in the administration and interpretation 
of diagnostic, formative, summative and authentic assessments and review strategies related to the utilization of various 
screening  tools  for  identifying  children  needing  additional  interventions.    Prerequisites:    Approved  Application  to  the 
School of Education and EDUC 222. 

EDUC 425  Student Teaching Practicum 

12 credits 

Each student will be placed in an appropriate certification site for 15-weeks.  Students are also required to participate 
in seminar during the student teaching experience.  The seminar portion of the semester will include the compilation of a 
professional portfolio that reflects the diverse strategies, methodologies,  practices and realities of teaching in their host 
schools.  Prerequisites:   Approved application to the School of Education; successful completion of all observation and 
field experiences; 3.00 GPA; completion of all PRAXIS exams required for PDE certification; negative TB test;  current 
clearances as required by PDE. 

EDUC 432  Student Teaching Seminar 

3 credits 

Senior seminar course for all education majors accomplishing their student teaching practicum.  Students compile a 
professional portfolio that reflects the diverse strategies, methodologies, practices, and realities of teaching in their host 
schools. Current educational issues and problems discussed and documented. Reflective journal maintained noting how 
best to translate skills, knowledge, and educational theory into successful practice in the school setting. Co-requisite: School 
Teaching Practicum and school site internship. 

EDUC 434  Student Teaching I 
         Each student will be placed in an appropriate certification site to complete 160 hours of student teaching. Students 
will reflect on the diverse strategies, methodologies, practice, and realities of teaching in their host schools. Students are 
required to demonstrate competency across planning, classroom environment, instruction, and professionalism. 

3 credits 

EDUC 435  Student Teaching II 
        Each student will be placed in an appropriate certification site to complete 260 hours of student teaching. Students 
will reflect on the diverse strategies, methodologies, practices, and realities of teaching in their host schools. Students are 
required to demonstrate competency across planning, classroom environment, instruction, and professionalism. 

3 credits 

EDUC 450  Advanced Seminar:  Instructional Studies 

6 credits 

This  six-credit  senior  seminar  is  offered  to  those  undergraduate  students  nearing  graduation.    During  this 
semester,  the  student  will  make  connections  between  the  academic  learning  of  the  program  and  the  professional 
world.  Opportunities will be presented in which the student can summarize, evaluate, and integrate some or all of 
their major academic course work into a professional experience.  At the completion of the semester, the production 
and presentation of a professional portfolio of academic achievements will be required. 

EDUC 194, EDUC 294       Special Topics                                                             

EDUC 295, EDUC 395, EDUC 495  Special Topics in Education I, II, III 

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

EDUC 296, EDUC 396, EDUC 496  Independent Study in Education I, II, III 

1-6-credits          

EE – ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING  

EE 101  

Circuit Analysis I 

3 credits 

Introduction  to  electrical  engineering  through  the  study  of  elementary  circuit  analysis.  Definition  of  electrical 
quantities including charge, current, voltage, and power. Physical and electrical properties of resistors, inductors, capacitors, 

302 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and sources. Application of circuit laws and theorems to the analysis of resistive dc circuits. Nodal and mesh techniques 
for analysis of large-scale resistive networks. Ideal operational amplifiers and elementary op amp circuits. Time response of 
first- and second-order resistor-inductor-capacitor circuits. Prerequisite or co-requisite: MATH 190 (Calculus I). 

EE 102  

Circuit Analysis II 

3 credits 

Continuation of EE 101. Review of complex numbers and complex algebra. Extension of dc circuit laws and theorems 
to  the  phasor  analysis  of  sinusoidal  steady-state  circuits.  Power  calculations,  power  measurement,  and  power  factor 
correction in single- and poly-phase systems. Resonance, network functions, frequency response, and Bode plotting. Linear 
and ideal transformers. Prerequisite: EE 101 (Circuit Analysis I); prerequisite or co-requisite: MATH 210 (Calculus II). 

EE 103  

Circuit Analysis Laboratory I 

1 credit 

Introduction to circuit components, test equipment, and work practices in a typical low-voltage electrical laboratory. 
Prototyping and testing of circuits that demonstrate the principles studied in EE 101. Computer simulation of circuits 
using industry-standard software. Co-requisite: EE 101 (Circuit Analysis I).  

EE 104  

Circuit Analysis Laboratory II 

1 credit 

Continuation  of  EE  103.  Prototyping  and  testing  of  circuits  that  demonstrate  the  principles  studied  in  EE  102. 
Computer simulation of circuits using industry-standard software. Prerequisite: EE 103 (Circuit Analysis Laboratory I); co-
requisite: EE 102 (Circuit Analysis II). 

EE 221  

Electronics I 

4 credits 

Introduction  to  semiconductor  electronics.  Physical  and  electrical  characteristics  of  diodes,  bipolar  junction 
transistors,  and  field-effect  transistors.  Analysis  and  design  of  common  electronic  circuits  such  as  rectifiers,  limiters, 
switches, and amplifiers. Introduction to power devices and power amplifiers. Laboratory includes prototyping, testing, and 
computer  simulation  of  circuits  that  demonstrate  the  principles  studied  in  the  lecture.  Prerequisites:  EE  102  (Circuit 
Analysis II), EE 104 (Circuit Analysis Laboratory II). 

EE 222  

Electronics II 

4 credits 

Continuation  of  EE  221.  Analysis  of  differential  and  multi-stage  amplifiers,  current  sources,  and  active  loads. 
Characteristics and applications of analog integrated circuits with emphasis on the design of operational amplifier circuits. 
Use  of  feedback  in  discrete  and  integrated  circuit  amplifiers.  Introduction  to  digital  logic  and  MOSFET  logic  gates. 
Laboratory includes prototyping, testing, and computer simulation of circuits that demonstrate the principles studied in 
the lecture. Prerequisite: EE 221 (Electronics I). 

EE 194, EE  294       Special Topics                                                                  

EE 331  

Electrical Power I 

 3 credits 

4 credits 

Introduction  to  electromechanical  devices  and  energy  conversion.  Analysis  of  magnetic  materials  and  systems. 
Electromagnetic  induction  and  the  production  of  electromagnetic  torque.  Physical  and  electrical  characteristics  of 
transformers, three-phase induction motors, synchronous motors and generators, and dc motors and generators. Use of 
equivalent  circuit  models,  standard  formulas,  and  graphical  techniques  to  predict  machine  performance.  Laboratory 
includes measurements on typical machines and systems and instruction in electrical safety practices. Prerequisite: EE 102 
(Circuit Analysis II). 

EE 332  

Electrical Power II 

4 credits 

Continuation of EE 331. Physical and electrical characteristics of single-phase induction motors and other rotating 
machines. Use of equivalent circuit models, standard formulas, and graphical techniques to predict machine performance. 
Introduction to power system analysis including system models, per-unit calculations, power flows, and symmetrical and 
unsymmetrical  fault  calculations.  Laboratory  includes  computer  simulations,  measurements  on  typical  machines  and 
systems, and instruction in electrical safety practices. Prerequisite: EE 331 (Electrical Power I). 

EE 351  

Digital Electronics I 

3 credits 

Characteristics and applications of digital logic devices. Computation using the binary, octal, and hexadecimal number 
systems.  Introduction  to  Boolean  algebra.  Combinational  and  sequential  logic  design  using  algebraic  and  graphical 
methods. Study of typical logic circuits including multiplexers, decoders, adders, counters, and shift registers. Laboratory 
includes implementation of digital systems using standard logic families and programmable devices. Prerequisites: EE 222 
(Electronics II), ET 204 (Programming for Engineering Technology). 

303 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EE 352    Microprocessors I 

3 credits 

Introduction to modern microprocessor devices and applications. Programming in assembly language. Hardware and 
software  development  to  perform  common  tasks  in  data  acquisition,  control,  and  computation.  Laboratory  includes 
implementation  of  designs  using  industry-standard  microcontrollers  and  programming  practices.  Prerequisite:  EE  351 
(Digital Electronics I). 

EE 375  

Signals and Systems 

4 credits 

Introduction to the mathematical analysis of physical systems. Representation of linear systems in the time domain 
using  differential  and  difference  equations.  Time-domain  analysis  using  integration  and  recursion.  Frequency-domain 
analysis using Fourier, Laplace, and z-transform techniques. Consideration of practical system limitations such as finite 
bandwidth  and  finite  sampling  rate.  Laboratory  includes  computer  simulations  and  prototyping  of  typical  systems. 
Prerequisites: MATH 230 (Linear Algebra I), MATH 310 (Differential Equations). 

EE 385, EE 485 Electrical Engineering Seminar 

0 credits 

Taken only upon recommendation of their faculty advisors, this course is intended for students who are transferring 
into the Electrical Engineering program. Specialized topics studied in this course together with their previous coursework 
will provide transfer students with advanced standing in the program and attainment of the prescribed student outcomes. 
The topics and format of this course are determined individually for each student by agreement of the faculty advisor, the 
course instructor, and the student. This course may be repeated for credit as needed. 

EE 415  

Electromagnetics 

4 credits 

Introduction to classical electromagnetics. Three-dimensional vectors and coordinate systems. Description of electric, 
magnetic, and electromagnetic fields using Maxwell's equations. Theory and applications of transmission lines. Propagation 
of guided and unguided waves. Introduction to antennas. Laboratory includes the use of vector network analysis and S 
parameters in microwave measurement and design. Prerequisites: EE 222 (Electronics II), MATH 300 (Calculus III). 

EE 425  

Power Electronics 

4 credits 

Characteristics and  applications  of  power  semiconductors including  diodes,  ,  BJTs,  IGBTs,  and  FETs.  Analysis  of 
rectifiers, converters, and inverters as the fundamental elements of power thyristors electronic systems. Design of switching 
power  supplies  and  motor  controllers.  Consideration  of  power  quality  issues  such  as  harmonic  generation  in  a  power 
electronic environment. Laboratory includes computer simulations and prototyping of typical circuits studied in the lecture. 
Prerequisites: EE 222 (Electronics II), EE 332 (Electrical Power II). 

EE 435  

Electrical Distribution Systems 

4 credits 

Design of electrical power distribution systems for residential, commercial, and industrial occupancies in accordance 
with the National Electrical Code. Load studies to determine power requirements. Specification and layout of transformers, 
service  equipment,  feeders,  panelboards,  and  branch  circuits.  Fault  analysis  to  coordinate  overcurrent  protection 
throughout  a  system.  Introduction  to  illumination  engineering  and  design  of  interior  and  exterior lighting.  Laboratory 
includes study of the National Electrical Code and completion of design projects to meet realistic criteria and constraints. 
Prerequisite: EE 332 (Electrical Power II). 

EE 445  

Control Systems 

4 credits 

Design of feedback control systems using both continuous- and discrete-time representations. Laplace and z transform 
techniques for computing time and frequency responses. Stability tests and the use of compensation to achieve stability and 
improve system performance. Laboratory includes computer simulations and the implementation of a complete software-
based control system. Prerequisite: EE 375 (Signals and Systems). 

EE 455  

Digital Electronics II 

4 credits 

Advanced  topics  in  digital  design.  Definition  of  digital  systems  using  schematic  capture,  hardware  description 
languages, and computer-aided engineering software. Implementation of digital logic using modern components such as 
complex  programmable  logic  devices  (CPLDs)  and  field-programmable  gate  arrays  (FPGAs).  Use  of  embedded  soft-core 
processors to run microcontroller code within a programmable logic device. Laboratory includes the design, simulation, 
and hardware implementation of typical systems. Prerequisite: EE 352 (Microprocessors I). 

EE 465  

Communication Electronics 

4 credits 

Analysis and design of communication circuits including tuned matching networks, small-signal amplifiers, large-signal 
amplifiers,  oscillators,  mixers,  modulators,  and  demodulators.  Theory  of  amplitude,  frequency,  and  phase  modulation. 
Transmitter  and  receiver  topologies.  Effects  of  noise  in  communication  systems.  Laboratory  includes  the  use  of  radio-
frequency instruments such as spectrum analyzers and vector network analyzers to design and test circuits studied in the 
lecture. Prerequisites: EE 222 (Electronics II), EE 375 (Signals and Systems). 

304 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EE 467  

Digital Signal Processing 

4 credits 

Conversion  of  analog  signals  to  digital  form  and  reconstruction  of  analog  signals  from  their  digital  form. 
Representation of signals and systems in the discrete-time and z-transform domains. Design of digital filters using standard 
topologies and algorithms. Additional applications of digital signal processing such as waveform generators and modulators. 
Computational considerations in implementing  practical systems.  Noise effects and recovery of noise-corrupted signals. 
Laboratory includes simulation, design, and hardware implementation of representative digital systems. Prerequisites: EE 
375 (Signals and Systems), EE 455 (Digital Electronics II). 

EET – ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY 

EET 102  Direct Current Circuits 

  3 credits 

Definitions of charge, current, voltage, power, and resistance. Ohm's and Kirchhoff's laws. Analysis of dc networks 
including nodal and mesh techniques and use of network theorems. Introduction to ideal operational amplifiers. Properties 
of linear capacitors and inductors. Time response of first-order resistor-capacitor and resistor-inductor circuits. Prerequisite 
or co-requisite: MATH 180 (College Algebra). 

EET 103  Alternating Current Circuits  

3 credits 

Introduction to complex numbers and complex algebra. Phasor analysis of sinusoidal steady-state networks including 
nodal  and  mesh  techniques  and  use  of  network  theorems.  Power  calculations,  power  measurement,  and  power  factor 
correction in ac networks. Resonance, network functions, and frequency response. Polyphase systems. Linear transformers. 
Prerequisites: EET 102 (Direct Current Circuits), MATH 185 (Trigonometry), NSET 101 (Introduction to the Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Technology). 

EET 104   Direct Current Circuits Laboratory 

1 credit 
Laboratory study of direct current circuits.  Prerequisite or co-requisite: EET 102 (Direct Current Circuits). 

EET 105  Alternating Current Circuits Laboratory 

1 credit 

Laboratory  study  of  alternating  current  circuits.  Prerequisite:  EET  104  (Direct  Current  Circuits  Laboratory).  Co-

requisite: EET 103 (Alternating Current Circuits).  

EET 200   Basic Electronics 

4 credits 

Introduction  to  semiconductor  devices  including  diodes,  bipolar  junction  transistors,  and  field-effect  transistors. 
Analysis  and  design  of  rectifiers,  switches,  and  amplifiers.  Small-signal  characteristics  of  discrete  transistor  amplifiers 
including  gain  and  frequency  response.  Introduction  to  power  devices  and  power  amplifiers.  Laboratory  includes 
experiments and computer simulations. Prerequisite: EET 103 (Alternating Current Circuits). Co-requisite: MATH 190 
(Calculus I). 

EET 201 

Electronic Circuits 

4 credits 

Continuation  of  EET  200.    Analysis  and  design  of  operational  amplifier  circuits  including  amplifiers,  filters,  and 
oscillators. Applications of analog integrated circuits in communication, instrumentation, and data conversion. Study of 
thyristors  and  regulators  for  power  conversion  and  control.  Introduction  to  photovoltaic  devices.  Laboratory  includes 
experiments and computer simulations. Prerequisite: EET 200 (Basic Electronics). 

EET 215  Digital Electronics I 

3 credits 

Electrical characteristics of digital logic devices. Number systems and Boolean algebra. Combinational and sequential 
logic design using standard techniques such as Karnaugh maps. Study of common logic circuits including multiplexers, 
decoders, adders, flip-flops, counters, and shift registers. Implementation of digital systems using standard logic families 
and  programmable  devices.  Prerequisites:  EET  201  (Electronic  Circuits),  ET  204  (Programming  for  Engineering 
Technology). 

EET 216  Microprocessors I 

3 credits 

Introduction  to  modern  microprocessor  architecture,  characteristics,  and  applications.  Programming  in  assembly 
language. Hardware and software development to perform common tasks in data acquisition, control, and computation. 
Implementation of designs using industry-standard components and practices. Prerequisite: EET 215 (Digital Electronics 
I). 

305 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
EET 305  Communication Electronics 

4 credits 

Analysis and design of communication circuits including tuned matching networks, small-signal amplifiers, large-signal 
amplifiers and oscillators, mixers, modulators, and demodulators. Introduction to Fourier transform analysis. Theory of 
amplitude,  frequency,  and  phase  modulation.  Transmitter  and  receiver  topologies.  Effects  of  noise  in  communication 
systems.  Prerequisites:  EET 201 (Electronic Circuits), MATH 210 (Calculus II). 

EET 327 

Electrical Power Technology I 

3 credits 

Electromagnetic principles of rotating machines. Characteristics and applications of dc generators, dc motors, and ac 
generators. Electronic control of dc motors. Methods of power generation including economics and environmental effects. 
Study  of  modern  topics  in  generation,  motor  control,  and  energy  using  the  current  literature.  Prerequisites:  EET  103 
(Alternating Current Circuits), ET 204 (Programming for Engineering Technology) 

EET 328 

Electrical Power Technology II 

3 credits 

Continuation of EET 327. Transformers, three-phase induction and synchronous motors, and single-phase motors. 
Electronic control of ac motors. Basics of electrical power transmission and an introduction to the smart grid, micro grids, 
and  dc  transmission.  Study  of  modern  topics  in  power  transmission  and  motor  controls  using  the  current  literature. 
Prerequisite: EET 327 (Electrical Power Technology I).  

EET 348  Control Systems I 

4 credits 

Introduction to feedback control systems. Time-domain and Laplace transform analysis of linear systems, including 
time  response,  frequency  response,  stability,  and  compensation.  Transducers,  actuators,  and  electronic  circuits  used  in 
process control. Use of PCs for data acquisition and control. Software simulation of control systems. Prerequisites: MATH 
310 (Differential Equations), EET 201 (Electronic Circuits). 

EET 401   Field Theory and Microwaves 

4 credits 

Introduction to classical electromagnetics. Vectors and coordinate systems. Electric, magnetic, and electromagnetic 
fields.  Maxwell's  equations.  Theory  and  applications  of transmission  lines.  Propagation  of  guided  and  unguided waves. 
Introduction  to  antennas.  Use  of  vector  network  analysis  and  S  parameters  in  microwave  measurement  and  design. 
Prerequisites: EET 201 (Electronic Circuits), MATH 210 (Calculus II) 

EET 415  Digital Electronics II 

3 credits 

Advanced  techniques  for  digital  system  design  including  hardware  description  languages  and  computer-aided 
engineering  software.  Implementation  of  digital  logic  using  modern  components  such  as  complex  programmable  logic 
devices and field-programmable gate arrays. Prerequisite: EET 216 (Microprocessors I). 

EET 416    Microprocessors II 

3 credits 

Specification, design, and construction of a microprocessor-based project. Use of modern development tools such as 

computer-aided engineering software and logic analyzers. Prerequisite: EET 415 (Digital Electronics II). 

EET 421 

Electrical Power Systems 

3 credits 

Analysis  of  electrical  power  systems  including  models,  per-unit  calculations,  power  flows,  and  symmetrical  and 
unsymmetrical fault calculations using both hand and computer computation. Introduction to the smart grid, micro grids, 
and  dc  transmission.  Study  of  modern  topics  in  power  systems  using  the  current  literature.  Prerequisites:  EET  328 
(Electrical Power Technology I), MATH 230 (Linear Algebra I). 

EET 426   Commercial Electrical Design 

3 credits 

Electrical  design  procedures  for  commercial  and  industrial  occupancies  including  specification  and  protection  of 
feeders and branch circuits based on the National Electrical Code. Lighting techniques, harmonic effects, on-site power 
generation, and energy efficiency. Study of modern topics in electrical design using the current literature. Prerequisite: EET 
328 (Electrical Power Technology I). 

EET 448  Control Systems II 

4 credits 

Continuation of EET 348. Advanced techniques for the analysis and design of feedback control systems using both 
continuous- and discrete-time representations. Investigation of typical systems through computer simulation and hardware 
implementation. Prerequisite: EET 348 (Control Systems I). 

EET 194, EET 294       Special Topics                                                                   

3 credits 

306 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EET 295, EET 395, EET 495 
Special Topics in Electrical Engineering Technology I, II, III 

EET 296, EET 396, EET 496  Independent Study in Electrical  
Engineering Technology I, II, III  

EET 499   Honors Internship in Electrical Engineering Technology 

See BIOL 499 for course description. 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits   

1-6 credits 

EGR – ENGINEERING 

Introduction to Engineering                                                                                   

EGR 101  
      An introduction to the professions in engineering including fundamentals and ethical practices. Software relevant to 
engineering fields will be utilized to solve practical problems. Additionally, a research project and oral presentation 
related to these fields will be required.  

3 credits 

EGR 401   Engineering Design I 

3 credits 

Consideration of legal, ethical, social, and economic factors in engineering practice. Use of effective oral and written 
communication  techniques  in  the  workplace.  Application  of  project  management  tools  including  proposals,  progress 
reports, and design reviews. Student teams propose design projects that will be completed in EGR 402; by the end of the 
term, each team’s proposal must be accepted by the project sponsor. Prerequisite: 12 credits of major courses at the 300 or 
400 level. 

EGR 402   Engineering Design II 

3 credits 

Continuation of EGR 401. Student teams complete the projects proposed in EGR 401 in a collaborative, professional 
atmosphere using management tools such as engineering notebooks, progress reports, and design reviews. By the end of 
the term, each team must document and deliver the product described in its proposal. Prerequisite: EGR 401 (Engineering 
Design I). 

ET – ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY 

Programming for Engineering Technology 

ET 204  
        Introduction  to  a  modern  high-level  computer  language.  Discussion  of  data  types,  program  structures,  common 
programming  tasks,  and  data  storage  techniques.  Application  to  representative  problems  in  engineering  technology 
including rudimentary numerical methods and data analysis. Prerequisite: NSET 101 (Introduction to the Natural Sciences 
and Engineering Technology). Co-requisite: MATH 190 (Calculus I). 

3 credits 

ET 405 

Fundamentals of Engineering Examination I 

0 credits 

Benefits,  requirements,  and  procedures  for  becoming  licensed  as  a  professional  engineer.  Introduction  to  the 
Fundamentals of Engineering examination as the first step in professional licensure. Students must register for the F.E. 
examination as a requirement of this course. Prerequisite: Eligibility to take the F.E. examination as determined by state 
regulations. 

ET 406 

Fundamentals of Engineering Examination II   

0 credits 

Strategies  and  hints  for  taking  the  Fundamentals  of  Engineering  examination.  Students  must  take  the  F.E. 

examination as a requirement of this course. Prerequisite: ET 405. 

ET 407 

Professional Problems in Engineering Technology    

3 credits 

Consideration of the technical, economic, ethical, and social issues surrounding engineering design. Students working 
in teams will plan, design, and complete a faculty-approved project that integrates technical and non-technical skills. The 
course will include case studies, on-line learning experiences, and both written and oral presentations. Prerequisites: 12 
credits of Department Major Requirements at the 300 and 400 level. 

307 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ETGR – ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY GRAPHICS 

ETGR 205  Engineering Technology Graphics 

3 credits 

Introduction to graphical representation using hand drawing and computer-aided drafting. Orthographic projection, 
dimensioning,  sketching,  and  visualization.  Use  of  layers,  line  types,  blocks,  and  scale  as  they  relate  to  orthographic 
projection. 

ENGL – ENGLISH 

ENGL 101  College Composition 

3 credits 

Students will write argument-based assignments leading to an independently researched project based on academic 
and professional goals.  Students will be required to 1.) find and integrate a variety of sources, 2.) read and analyze these 
sources,  3.)  develop  strong  thesis  statements  that  reflect  perspectives  on  topics  or  issues,  and  4.)  construct  persuasive 
arguments that engage with the viewpoints of experts and commentators. As the term progresses, students will have the 
opportunity to re-think or revise the ideas and perspectives they explored in earlier writing assignments by engaging with 
peer feedback and revising earlier drafts. Placement recommendations will require students to take ENGL 101 as a three-
credit course OR in conjunction with an additional credit of lab or studio instruction.  Students who earn F or NP grades 
in ENGL 101 will be required to re-take the course in conjunction with a one-credit Writing Studio course. 

ENGL 120   Introduction to Literary Studies 

3 credits 

ENGL 120 will introduce students to the scholarly study of literature. Students will learn to read and analyze 
at least three genres, such as the novel, the drama, and the short story, with attention to the different techniques and forms 
that writers use to create meaning. Students will also master the critical vocabulary of literary studies, and will learn to 
produce strong, persuasive close readings of literary texts. Prerequisite: ENGL 101. 

ENGL 146  Writing Lab 

1 credit 

This one-hour course is designed to provide supplemental instruction in writing and to support the learning 
objectives  of  ENGL  101, with  particular  attention  to  the writing  process  and  grammar,  spelling,  and  mechanics.    This 
course will be graded on a Pass/No Credit basis.  Co-requisite: ENGL 101. 

ENGL 147, 148, 149  Writing Studio I, II, III 

1 credit 

This  one-credit  course  is  designed  to  provide  supplemental  instruction  in  writing  through  collaborative  activities, 
conferences, and guided work time and may be taken in conjunction with ENGL 101: College Composition or any Writing 
Intensive (WI)-designated course.  Writing Studio will be graded on a Pass/No Credit basis.  Co-requisite: ENGL 101 or 
any Writing Intensive (WI) course. 

ENGL 200   Creative Writing 

3 credits 

Students will write in multiple genres, including but not limited to poetry, fiction, and creative nonfiction, among 
others. Class experiences will include workshop, peer review, revision, reading work aloud, and compiling a portfolio of 
creative work. Pre-requisite:  ENGL 101 or its equivalent. 

ENGL 250  World Literature: Drama, Poetry, Epic 

3 credits 

ENGL 250 will introduce students to the fundamentals of literary studies, including terms, definitions, and research 
methodologies.  Students will learn what it means to produce a close reading, what different interpretative perspectives can 
offer us as we read a text, how to distinguish between primary and secondary sources, and how to research and develop a 
literary analysis. Prerequisite:  ENGL 101. 

ENGL 251  World Literature: Novels 

3 credits 

ENGL 251 will introduce students to the fundamentals of literary studies, including terms, definitions, and research 
methodologies.  Students will learn what it means to produce a close reading, what different interpretative perspectives can 
offer us as we read a text, how to distinguish between primary and secondary sources, and how to research and develop a 
literary analysis. Prerequisite:  ENGL 101. 

ENGL 252  The Art of Creative Nonfiction 

3 credits 

A course covering a broad range of prose including essay, memoir, biography, autobiography, and expository writing, 
as well as some fiction and short story as it has been practiced in western culture over the past five hundred years. The 

308 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
course will cover historic, generic, formal, and thematic aspects of prose.  Students will be expected to analyze and perform 
close readings of individual prose texts examining content, technical aspects, and context, and to share those interpretations 
both verbally and in writing, as well as to create imaginative text of their own authorship (personal essay, memoir, etc.) that 
reflects the conventions of the genre.   Prerequisite:  ENGL 101 or equivalent.  Dual listed as COPA 252. 

ENGL 253  The Art of Poetry 

3 credits 

A course covering a broad range of lyric poetry as it has been practiced in western culture over the past five hundred 
years. The course will cover historic, generic, formal, and thematic aspects of poetry.  Students will be expected to analyze 
and  perform  close  readings  of  individual  poems  including  content,  technical  aspects,  and  context,  and  to  share  those 
interpretations both verbally and in writing, as well as to create imaginative text of their own authorship (poetry) that reflects 
the conventions of the genre of poetry. Prerequisite: ENGL 101 or equivalent.  Dual listed as COPA 253. 

ENGL 254  The Art of the Short Story 

3 credits 

A course covering the development of the short story as it has been practiced in Western culture over the past two 
hundred years. The course will cover historic, generic, formal, and thematic aspects of the short story. Students will be 
expected to analyze and perform close readings of individual texts, examining content, technical aspects, and context, and 
to share those interpretations both verbally and in writing. Prerequisite: ENGL 101 or equivalent.  Dual listed as COPA 
254. 

ENGL 255  Theoretical Approaches to the Study of Literature  

3 credits 

A multi-genre and/or multicultural course that examines both primary and secondary sources in any one of a number 
of traditional avenues of inquiry within Literary Studies. Approaches might have a critical basis (such as race, sexuality, 
class,  religion,  ethnicity,  or  gender)  or  a  contextual  basis  (emphasizing  a  particular  genre,  movement,  or  region). 
Prerequisites: ENGL 101 or equivalent. 

ENGL 260  British Literature I 

3 credits 

A study of major literary periods and genres in England up through the 18th century.  Prerequisite: ENGL 120 or an 

ENGL 200-level course. 

ENGL 261  British Literature II 

3 credits 

A study of the major literary periods (Romantic, Victorian, Modernist, and Contemporary) and genres from 1789 to 

the present.  Prerequisite: ENGL 120 or an ENGL 200-level course. 

ENGL 262   American Literature I 

3 credits 

A  study  of  the  major  literary  periods  and  genres  from  the  colonial  period  through  the  American  Renaissance.  

Prerequisite: ENGL 120 or an ENGL 200-level course. 

ENGL 263   American Literature II 

3 credits 

A study of the major literary periods and genres from the American Renaissance through Contemporary.  Prerequisite: 

ENGL 120 or an ENGL 200-level course. 

ENGL 300  Topics 1 

3 credits 

An intensive study of selected literary works organized by a single critical or theoretical method practiced within the 

field of literary studies.  Topics may vary by semester.  Prerequisite: ENGL 250+. 

ENGL 301  Topics 2 

3 credits 

An intensive study of selected literary works that utilizes a topic or approach organized on a contextual basis (such as 
a particular genre, movement, or region, or thematic principle).  Topics may vary by semester.  Prerequisite: ENGL 250+. 

ENGL 302  Linguistics 

3 credits 

Provides students with an introduction to broad areas of linguistic theory and inquiry, including an introduction to 
the  study  of  morphology,  semantics,  syntax,  phonetics,  phonology,  and  historical  linguistics.    It  also  includes  an 
introduction to areas included within the disciplines of psycholinguistics and sociolinguistics. Dual listed as MLNG 302. 

ENGL 305  Authors 1 

An intensive study of the works of a single major author.  Prerequisite: ENGL 250+. 

3 credits 

309 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENGL 306  Authors 2 

3 credits 

An  intensive  study  of  the  works  of  two  or  three  major  authors  examined  in  the  context  of  one  another’s  work.  

Prerequisite: ENGL 250+. 

ENGL 315  Language & Theory 1 

3 credits 

An intensive study focusing on a specific approach to understanding language as a subject in itself, including its nature, 

structure, function, and development.  Prerequisite: ENGL 250+ or permission. 

ENGL 316  Language & Theory 2 

3 credits 

An intensive study of theoretical frameworks for understanding the interaction of language and meaning, especially 

across cultural contexts.  Some courses may be cross-listed.  Prerequisite: ENGL 250+ or permission. 

ENGL 335   History of the English Language 

3 credits 

English  from  its  Teutonic  beginnings  to  the  present  day.  Changes  in  vocabulary,  syntax,  pronunciation  and  style. 

Prerequisites:  ENGL 250 or ENGL 251. 

ENGL 338   Literary Criticism 

3 credits 

A  study  of  the  basic  and  recurrent  issues  of  literary  theory  and  practice  from  Aristotle  to  the  present.  Writing-in-

discipline class. Prerequisites:  ENGL 250 or ENGL 251. 

ENGL 340  Periods & Traditions 1 

3 credits 

An intensive study of a single period or tradition in British literature before 1800.  Prerequisite: ENGL 250+. 

ENGL 341  Periods & Traditions 2 

3 credits 

An intensive study of a single period or tradition in American literature before 1860.  Prerequisite: ENGL 250+. 

ENGL 342  Periods & Traditions 3 

3 credits 

An intensive study of a single period or tradition in British literature between 1800 and 1945.  Prerequisite: ENGL 

250+. 
ENGL 343  Periods & Traditions 4 

3 credits 

An intensive study of a single period or tradition in American literature from 1860-1945. Prerequisite:  ENGL 250+.  

ENGL 344  Periods & Traditions 5 

3 credits 

An intensive study of a single period or tradition in literature after 1945.  Prerequisite: ENGL 250+. 

ENGL 365  Creative Nonfiction Workshop 1 

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in creative nonfiction.  
Students will also master the ethics and practices of workshopping and responding to writing by their peers.  Portfolios will 
be compiled by each student in the workshop.  Prerequisite:  ENGL 200 

ENGL 366   Fiction Workshop 1 

3 credits 

This  course  will  be  a  workshop  environment,  garnering  a  significant  output  of  original  creative  work  in  fiction. 
Students will also master the ethics and practices of workshopping and responding to writing by their peers.  Portfolios will 
be compiled by each student in the workshop.  Prerequisite: ENGL 200 

ENGL 367   Poetry Workshop 1 

3 credits 

This  course  will  be  a  workshop  environment,  garnering  a  significant  output  of  original  creative  work  in  poetry. 
Students will also master the ethics and practices of workshopping and responding to writing by their peers.  Portfolios will 
be compiled by each student in the workshop.  Prerequisite: ENGL 200 

ENGL 399   Literary Arts Practicum 

1-3 credits 

This course allows students to gain practical, hands-on experience by acting as creative work/research assistants on 
projects being done by LCS faculty or Point Park faculty members in other departments. The nature and scope of the work 
will be agreed upon by the student and faculty member, and approved by the Literature, Culture, & Society department. 
The goal of the practicum is to allow the student to broaden their knowledge on a particular subject, and to give them 
experience performing work at a professional level as well as meeting the deadlines given by their faculty supervisor. By 
engaging  in  the  practicum  experience,  students  will  hone  their  critical  thinking,  reading,  and  writing  skills,  which  are 
essential  in  today's  competitive  job  market.  An  additional  opportunity  for  practicum  credit  is  to  serve  as  a  student 

310 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ambassador for the department (e.g., manage  social media, attend activities/events, mentor new majors, etc.). Students 
seeking approval for a student project practicum would be required to arrange to be supervised by an LCS faculty member. 
A 3-credit LCS student practicum requires generally 150 hours of work; however credits per hour would vary depending 
on the nature of the project. 

ENGL 401  Creative Nonfiction Workshop 2  

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in creative nonfiction. 
Emphasis will include the craft of the genre as students concentrate on consistency in voice, choices in narrative and psychic 
distance to events, negotiations of dramatization and reflection, ethos and verisimilitude of an increasingly hostile genre, 
and control of prose through consistent, evocative technique.  The class will also address revision as an explicit aspect of 
the writing process.  Prerequisite: ENGL 365. 

ENGL 402  Creative Nonfiction Workshop 3  

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in creative nonfiction. 
Emphasis will include the craft of the genre as students concentrate on consistency in voice, choices in narrative and psychic 
distance to events, negotiations of dramatization and reflection, ethos and verisimilitude of an increasingly hostile genre, 
and control of prose through consistent, evocative technique.  The class will also require writing analytically about model 
texts.  Prerequisite: ENGL 401. 

ENGL 403  Fiction Workshop 2 

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in fiction. Emphasis 
will  include  the  craft  of  the  genre  as  students  concentrate  on  point  of  view,  psychic  distance,  plot,  dialogue,  scene, 
exposition, narrative time frame, flashback, dialogue, and “form(s)” of the short story.  The class will also address revision 
as an explicit aspect of the writing process.  Prerequisite: ENGL 366. 

ENGL 404  Fiction Workshop 3  

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in fiction. Emphasis 
will  include  the  craft  of  the  genre  as  students  concentrate  on  point  of  view,  psychic  distance,  plot,  dialogue,  scene, 
exposition, narrative time frame, flashback, dialogue, and “form(s)” of the short story.  The class will also require writing 
analytically about model texts.  Prerequisite: ENGL 403. 

ENGL 405  Poetry Workshop 2  

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in poetry. Emphasis 
will include the craft of the genre as students concentrate on form, concrete language, image, poetic conventions, the line, 
metaphor,  and  the  lyric  tradition.    The  class  will  also  address  revision  as  an  explicit  aspect  of  the  writing  process.  
Prerequisite: ENGL 367. 

ENGL 406  Poetry Workshop 3 

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in poetry. Emphasis 
will include the craft, theory, and traditions of the genre.  The class will also require students to respond analytically to 
model texts and/or essays on craft and prosody.  Prerequisite: ENGL 405. 

ENGL 411  Creative Nonfiction Workshop 4 

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in creative nonfiction. 
Emphasis will include the craft and theory of the genre as students concentrate on consistency in voice, choices in narrative 
and psychic distance to events, negotiations of dramatization and exposition, ethos and verisimilitude of an increasingly 
hostile genre, and control of prose through consistent, evocative technique.  Students will assemble a mini-collection of 
their work in creative nonfiction.  Prerequisite: ENGL 402. 

ENGL 412  Fiction Workshop 4 

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in fiction. Emphasis 
will  include  the  craft  of  the  genre  as  students  concentrate  on  point  of  view,  psychic  distance,  plot,  dialogue,  scene, 
exposition,  narrative  time  frame,  flashback,  dialogue,  and  “form(s)”  of  the  short  story.    Students  will  assemble  a  mini-
collection of their work in fiction.  Prerequisite: ENGL 404] 

ENGL 413  Poetry Workshop 4 

3 credits 

This course is a workshop environment, garnering a significant output of original creative work in poetry.  Emphasis 
will include the craft, theory, and traditions of the genre.  Students will assemble a mini-collection of their work in poetry.  
Prerequisite: ENGL 406. 

311 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENGL 419  Senor Capstone for the English Major 

3 credits 

As  the  capstone  course  for  English  Major,  ENGL  419 will  give  students  the  opportunity  to  enhance  their  critical 
reading, analysis, and research skills through real-world application.  Students in ENGL 419 will be asked to develop a 10-
15 page scholarly or career-oriented project that engages with a relevant theme/topic in English Studies.  This project will 
require student to enter into a critical conversation and engage meaningfully with secondary sources to develop original 
research or analysis of literary texts.  As they develop their research, students will collaboratively organize and promote a 
campus-wide or community event/project, which will be determined each semester by the instructor.  Assignments will 
include  a  portfolio  or  publicity-related  documents/materials;  weekly  reflection  or  logs  on  the  process  of  event/project 
planning; an abstract, annotated bibliography, a full draft, and revision of the 10-15 page project; and a formal presentation 
at the annual Literary Arts Symposium or another campus/community event.  Prerequisite:  Junior/Senior standing and 
at least four 300-level courses in ENGL. 

ENGL 420  Senior Seminar:  Craft and Critique  

3 credits 

This course will explore the process and production of contemporary literature and criticism.  The connections among 
the divergent areas of English studies will be explored through dialogue between students in both the ENGL and CW 
majors.  Students will read contemporary texts in both literature and criticism, as well as, where appropriate, historic texts.  
Final projects will require a portfolio of significant scope and quality. Prerequisites:  Senior Standing and at least 4 courses 
in ENGL at the 300+ level. 

ENGL 194, ENGL 294       Special Topics                                                             

3 credits 

ENGL 195, 295, ENGL 395, ENGL 495 
Special Topics in English or American Literature I, II, III  

ENGL 296, ENGL 396, ENGL 496   
Independent Study in English or American Literature I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits         

EPE – ENTERTAINMENT PRODUCTION ENGINEERING 

EPE 101 

Introduction to Entertainment Production Engineering 

  1 credit 

This course is the first of two courses that will introduce students to the live entertainment industry. Topics in this 
sequence of courses include navigating a professional load of freelance work and the associated labor, insurance and tax 
related constraints; introductions to the safety certifications most desired among workers in the field, including OSHA, 
Access,  MEWP,  and  possibly  others;  and  continual  advisement  on  local  gig  work  opportunities  in  the  regional 
entertainment field. Regular guest presentations from the field of live entertainment will initiate the students' networking 
opportunities and exposure to the field. Prerequisite: enrollment in the EPE program. 

EPE 102 

Introduction to Entertainment Production Engineering II 

  1 credit 

This course is the second of two courses that will introduce students to the live entertainment industry. Topics in this 
sequence of courses include navigating a professional load of freelance work and the associated labor, insurance and tax 
related constraints; introductions to the safety certifications most desired among workers in the field, including OSHA, 
Access, MEWP, Event Safety Alliance, and possibly others; and continual advisement on local gig work opportunities in 
the regional entertainment field. Regular guest presentations from the field of live entertainment will initiate the students' 
networking opportunities and exposure to the field. Prerequisite: enrollment in the EPE program. 

FIN – FINANCE 

Introduction to Financial Management 

FIN 200 
      This course explores the fundamental quantitative and behavioral economics concepts and tools of modern financial 
and business decision-making in the domestic and global financial environment. Prerequisites: MATH 180 

3 credits 

Financial Management 

FIN 300 
      Financial Management explores the fundamental quantitative and behavioral economics concepts and tools of modern 
financial  and  business  decision  making  in  the  domestic  and  global  financial  environment.  Prerequisites:  ACCT  210, 
MATH 180 

3 credits 

312 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Economics of Money & Banking 

FIN 306 
      The functioning of our monetary and banking system and the possible effects of monetary policy on the economy.  
Examines the ways domestic monetary policies affect global financial markets and international monetary arrangements. 

3 credits 

FIN 426     Investments 
        An analysis of securities and principles governing the management of investment assets from the perspective of issuers, 
investors,  and  the  financial  markets.  Topics  include:  investment  securities(types,  structure,  valuation),  capital  markets 
(primary, secondary), measurement of investment risk and return, modern portfolio theory, asset allocation, and financial 
engineering. 

3 credits 

International Finance 

FIN 431   
       This  class  examines  aspects  of  the  international  financial  arena.    It  explores  systematically  the  way  corporations 
function in the international financial setting.  It examines the role international financial institutions and the significance 
of exchange rate fluctuations in corporate behavior and performance. Prerequisites: ECON 201, 202, FIN 300. 

3 credits 

FIN 461    Risk Management 
      Risk management will enable organizations to identify strategies so as to deal effectively with risky possibilities that 
can impact detrimentally the organization. Management techniques and strategies covering credit, market, operational, and 
reputational  risks will be discussed to preserve an organization's value. Such strategies may include  hedging, insurance, 
contingent financing, and changes in organizational design that will enable an organization to overcome shocks of both a 
domestic and global nature. Prerequisites: ECON 201, 202, FIN 300. 

3 credits 

FIN 295, FIN 395, FIN 495        Special Topics in Finance I, II, and II 

FIN 296, FIN 396, FIN 496        Independent Study in Finance I, II, and II 

FREN – FRENCH 

FREN 101   Elementary French I 

An introduction to the French language and culture through conversation and basic grammar. 

FREN 102   Elementary French II 

A continuation of FREN 101. Prerequisite: FREN 101. 

FREN 201    Intermediate French I/Translation 

Reading and translation of various modern French texts. Prerequisite: FREN 102. 

FREN 202   Intermediate French II/Conversation 

Development of conversational fluency and practical composition. Prerequisite: FREN 102. 

FREN 215   French Culture 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

3 credits 

3 credits 

3 credits 

3 credits 

3 credits 

The  history  and  contemporary  life  of  France  and  the  French-speaking  world.  Provides  an  introduction  to  French 
culture through selected texts, current newspaper clippings and videos. Presented in English. Prerequisite: History 150 or 
permission of the instructor. Dual listed as HIST 215. 

FREN 194, FREN 294       Special Topics                                                                   

FREN 295, FREN 395, FREN 495 Special Topics in French I, II, III 

FREN 296, FREN 396, FREN 496  Independent Study in French I, II, III 

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

FSCI – FORENSIC SCIENCE 

FSCI 100    Development of the Death Investigation System 

3 credits 

A broad introduction of the development of the Death Investigation system from origin and inception through history 

313 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to  today’s  modern  forensic  practices.  Overview  of  future  job  opportunities  and  career  requirements.    Inclusive  of  a 
comparative analysis of various post mortem examinations, including hospitals versus forensic.  Descriptive and detailed 
workings of a functioning Medical Examiners (ME) office. 

FSCI 194, FSCI 294       Special Topics                                                                  

FSCI 301    Accident/Suicide Death Investigation 

 3 credits 

3 credits 

An  exploration  of  accidental  deaths  which  includes  motor  vehicle,  fire,  drowning,  overdose,  industrial,  medical 
misadventure and falls.  Each type of death will be examined in detail relevant to the forensic investigation and the scope 
of the problem both locally and nationally.  Students will be exposed to various methods of suicide, understand the patterns 
and reason along with the role of the forensic investigator. Special topics include Russian roulette and the significance of 
suicide notes. 

FSCI 370    Forensic Evidence I 

3 credits 

Overview  of  the  role  of  criminalists  from  crime  scene  through  laboratory  analysis.  This  includes  the  collection  of 
fingerprints, shoeprints, other impressions, ballistic and trace evidence (hair, fiber, glass, paint).  This class will include the 
identification, collection, preservation, documentation and analysis of evidence.  Several labs will provide practical hands-
on experience as well as realistic exposure to evidence collection. 

FSCI 371    Forensic Evidence II 

3 credits 

An expansion and broadening of the concepts learned in Forensic Evidence I. Topics to include poisoning, DNA, 
blunt  force  trauma,  stabbing,  time-of-death  determination,  issues  relating  to  firearms,  natural  and  man-made  disasters. 
Course  includes  an  introduction to  the  role  of  forensic  psychology,  profiling  and  crime-mapping.    Numerous  labs  will 
provide advanced practical hands-on experience as well as realistic exposure to evidence collection. Prerequisite: FSCI 370. 

FSCI 401    Ethics in Forensic Science 

3 credits 

This course will review the ethical issues specific to Forensic Science. Forensic science is used to convict the guilty and 
protect or exonerate the innocent.  Ethics means following the principles of natural justice, in all the activities without fear 
or favor in a neutral way. As Forensic Science is used to put the clues of a particular occurrence into finding the truth, and 
experts render testimony in Courts of Law, it is most essential that the evidence should be on Ethical Standards, not to be 
misleading or false. The course is not meant to dictate actions, but to offer the tools and some direction for dealing with 
difficult situations related to Forensic Science.  

FSCI 402    Natural Death Investigation 

3 credits 

An  examination  of  the  natural  death  processes  and  how  and  why  they  are  investigated.  This  class  encompasses: 
cardiovascular, respiratory, central nervous system and others.  In addition, the method for analyzing natural deaths from 
various sources, their meaning and impact on public health policies will be discussed.  Topics include the use of this data 
for analysis of various programs. Prerequisites: BIOL 225, BIOL 226. 

FSCI 455  

Internship in Forensic Science 

3 credits 

Students will work with their academic advisors and/or Instructors to identify either an accredited forensic laboratory 
or select criminal justice agencies with a Forensic evidence unit in the geographical area of their choosing. The Forensic 
Science Internship will provide the student with a professional work experience in an organizational environment. The 
internship  is  an  extension  of  the  curriculum  and  provides  meaningful  experience  related  to  the  student’s  area  of 
concentration. 

GCS – GLOBAL CULTURAL STUDIES 

GCS/MLNG 205     Languages of the World 

3 credits 

This course introduces students to theories of human language.  Students will look at how and when speech and 
writing systems developed, including the history and evolution of various protolanguages.  Students will study geographic, 
political, and sociocultural factors involved in language development and use.  The course includes language recognition 
and analysis activities and directed application of theory. 

GCS 215   Modernity, Colonialism and Capitalism             

3 credits 

A broad historic and geographic consideration of the “globalizing” cultural forces of the Modern era that have affected 
nearly  every  living  organism  on  the  planet.  Particular  attention  is  given  to  the  integrative  dynamics  of  capitalism, 
colonialism, and (neo)imperialism.   Prerequisite:  GCS 175. 

314 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GCS  194, GCS  294       Special Topics                                                                   

GCS/SOC 335 Revolutions 

3 credits 

3 credits 

This course focuses on “revolutions” as globalizing forces in human history; it begins with a discussion of the European 
Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolutions and proceeds through the American and French revolutions to the Bolshevik 
Revolution  incorporating  ancillary  “revolutions”  along  the  way,  including  discussions  of  some  or  all  of  the  following: 
European  colonial  expansion,  the  Bolivarian 
liberation,  Fordist  production,  consumerism,  Viet  Nam,  post 
industrialization/post-Fordism, postmodernity, neoliberalism, etc.  Prerequisite:  INES 175. 

GRID – GRAPHIC & INTERACTIVE DESIGN 

GRID 103   Graphic Design I                                                                                             
        This course introduces students to basic visual design theory and skills, including industry standard illustration, photo-
editing, and layout hardware and software. Students will create and revise visual materials to solve a variety of challenges. 
Students will also learn to effectively present their designs. 

3 credits 

GRID 160  Graphic Design Thinking  
       This course offers Graphic & Interactive Design students an introduction to problem solving methods used by graphic 
and interactive designers. Students learn basic problem analysis and idea generation methods that can be applied to graphic 
and  interactive  design  courses.  Through  research,  reference  materials,  tutorial  exercises  and  projects,  students  learn  to 
develop personal and innovative thinking for visual communications. Prerequisite: GRID 103 

3 credits 

GRID 205   Graphic Design Illustration                                                                              

3 credits 

This course offers students an introduction to drawing and illustration as a graphic designers. Students learn to draw 
basic  forms  for  thumbnails  and  roughs  that  can  be  applied  to  other  graphic  design  courses.  Techniques  and  tools  for 
drawing  shape,  value,  plane  and  volume  are  explored  through  gesture,  contour  and  other  drawing/illustration  styles. 
Composition and drawing/illustration typography are integral part of the course. This course will explore both hand drawn 
and vector software methods. Through reference materials, tutorial exercises and projects, students use software tools and 
menu commands to trace, draw and manipulate Bezier curves, and create illustrations. Students manipulate graphics and 
typographic forms to create final drawing compositions. Students also control and manipulate visual attributes and work 
with several color models to create, mix, and apply colors and tint. Prerequisites: GRID 103 

GRID 250   Graphic Design History 

                                                                                        3 credits    

This studio course focuses on the history of graphic design. Students will examine historic design and art movements 
and the thinking behind the work produced in context. Students will learn how designers in history developed, prototyped 
and used available materials. Emphasis is placed on developing design solutions in relationship to historic movements and 
designers. Students will learn the history of inventions that changed graphic design, how graphic design was reproduced, 
applied, and presented to the audience. Prerequisite: GRID 307, 205, and GRID 160. 

GRID 305   Typography I                                                                                                      

3 credits 

This course will study the design and use of basic letter forms, the anatomy of type, typographic contrast, hierarchy of 
information, major type families and characteristics, history of design and typographic grids. Students build skills for the 
art of typesetting and typographic layout, and for expressive typography and conceptual thinking. In addition to the history 
and theory of typography, students will learn to create their own personal typeface. Prerequisites: GRID 103 

GRID 307   Graphic Design II                                                                                                3 credits 

This course serves as a comprehensive study of theory, principles, strategies and tools of graphic design. In this course 
students learn to apply layout and design concepts to produce a variety of editorial, informational, and business materials 
for printing and digital distribution. Industry standard graphic design software provides a platform for these projects. Upon 
completion  of  this  course  students  will  have  a  variety  of  graphic  design  pieces  to  add  to  their  portfolios.  Prerequisite: 
GRID103.Dual listed with GRID 507. 

GRID 336   Branding and Identity Design                                                                           
       This course will examine the basic principles of corporate identity and develop a clear understanding of how to design 
brands. Emphasis will be placed on the steps needed for a consistent brand, such as identifying a company's personality; 
designing a logo; creating the visual elements that support the new brand; and developing and designing its visual voice for 

3 credits 

315 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a multiple uses including print, packaging, and interactive design. Students will complete design projects that explore a 
range of applications through exercises, group critiques, research and presentations,. Students will  conceive, create and 
produce, using industry standard software and methods. Projects will include identity designs including logos, stationary 
system(s) and graphic standards for one or more organizations. Students will conceive and create designs for promotional 
campaigns, including newsletters, brochures, magazine spreads, and marketing collateral. Prerequisites: GRID 103, GRID 
160, GRID 205, GRID 305, and GRID 307. Dual listed with GRID 536. 

GRID 340   Interactive  Design I 
        This studio course focuses on beginning interactive design. Students will begin to learn the similarities and differences 
when designing and producing work in print, web, and interactive mediums. Emphasis is placed on developing design 
solutions for web and interactive design. Students will learn industry software at a basic level used to design, produce, and 
code, web and interactive design. Students will learn about typographic needs and restrictions when designing for the web 
and interactive design versus print. Prerequisites:  GRID 307. 

                                                                                3 credits 

GRID 355   Magazine and Media Design                                                                              
      This course provide students with advanced planning, design and production techniques for creating and enhancing 
persuasive  editorial  design.  Students  will  use  industry  standard  software  combined  with  solid  theory  in  targeting  and 
reaching audiences. Students will conceive and create designs for promotional campaigns, including newsletters, brochures, 
magazine spreads and marketing collateral. Prerequisite: GRID 307. Dual listed with GRID 520 

3 credits 

GRID 405   Packaging and Retail Design                                                                              
      This studio course focuses on three-dimensional structures for a broad range of products that not only protect package 
contents but also create an experience for the user. Students examine how messages behave when distributed in three-
dimensional space. Conceptual development, prototyping, materials, type, image, layout, design and form are explored to 
create  direct  mail,  packaging,  point  of  purchase  display  and  environmental  designs.  Emphasis  is  placed  on  developing 
solutions  in  relationship  to  the  marketing  concepts  and  objectives.  The  class  will  also  focus  on  social,  sustainable  and 
environmental issues. Prerequisites: GRID 307. 

3 credits 

GRID 414   Professional Practices in Graphic Design 

                                                             3 credits 

Students will learn business skills to independently freelance as well as work for corporate clients. Emphasis will be 
placed on the creation and refinement of a resume, cover letter, business card, social media outlet and a live professional 
artist website. Students will also learn the business practices associated with creating freelance contracts, pricing hourly and 
long term commissions and filing of taxes. Students will examine legal and ethical concerns relevant to a freelance career 
in graphic design. Prerequisites: GRID 103,  307 and 340. 

GRID 415   Typography II                                                                                                        
       This  course  will  study  the  advanced  use  of  typography  in  multi-page  documents.  Students  will  learn  to  create  and 
experiment with typographic forms. Students will strengthen their ability to relate and use type and image all together in 
design  compositions.  Students  will  build  advanced  skills  for  typographic  layout,  expressive  typography  and  conceptual 
thinking. Students will learn to apply typography in a variety of graphic and interactive mediums. Learn the typographic  
different need in screen and interactive mediums. Prerequisite: GID 160, GID 205 and GID 307 

3 credits 

GRID 440   Interactive Graphic Design II                                                                            
       This studio course focuses on advanced interactive design. Students will learn these similarities and differences when 
design and producing in print, web, and interactive mediums. Emphasis is placed on developing design solutions for web 
and interactive design. Students will learn at an advanced level the industry software used to design, produce, code, web 
and interactive design. Prerequisites: GRID 160, GRID 205, GRID 307  

3 credits 

GRID 490   Graphic & Interactive Design Capstone                                                           
       This course will serve as a capstone to those in graphic & interactive design major. The course will be conducted in a 
workshop format, with students producing a branding package for themselves that includes resume, cover letter, and final 
print and web portfolio that they can use in their professional job search. Students will also produce a self-directed project 
that will support their employment goals in an area of graphic design and/or interactive design. Prerequisite: GRID 205, 
GRID 307, GRID 336, GRID 340. GRID 355, and passing the jr. graphic& interactive design portfolio review. 

3 credits 

GRID 295, 395,495: SPECIAL TOPICS 

1-6 credits 

GRID 296,396,496: INDEPENDENT STUDY 

                                                                 1-6 credits                                                               

316 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HHP – HIP HOP 

HHP 111   Hip Hop I: Social Dance 

3 credits 

This course is designed to educate and train the student on the foundations and origins of Hip Hop social dance. The 
course will explored social dances focusing on rhythm, musicality, groove and terminology. It will incorporate the history 
of the culture, through suggestive readings, documentaries, videos, lectures and discussions. Students will be challenged 
and encouraged to understand and apply historical and practical knowledge of Hip-Hop social dances through movement 
and written forms. 

HHP 121   Hip Hop II: Social Dances 

3 credits 

A  continuation  of  HHP  111,  this  course  will  engage  foundational  techniques,  terminology,  culture  and  history 
common to origins of Hip Hop movement and its association with music. The focus of the class is groove, coordination, 
and self-expression. This course is taught at the beginner II level. Prerequisite: HHP 111 

HHP 211   Hip Hop III 

3 credits 

This  course  is  a  continuation  of HHP  121  on  an  intermediate I  level.  Students  will  develop  an  understanding  of 
musicality, dynamics with emphasis on phrasing, spatial awareness, body alignment and coordination. Prerequisite: HHP 
121. 

HHP 221   Hip Hop IV 

3 credits 

This course is a continuation of HHP 211 on an intermediate II level. Emphasis is placed on technique, movement, 
phrasing, musicality, as well as the historical context required to develop skills needed to practice and perform Hip Hop 
movement aesthetics. Prerequisite: 211 

HHP 291   Hip Hop Rep I 

2 credits 

his course is an introduction to Hip Hop repertory focusing on the technical, stylistic, musical and artistic standards 
of each work. Instruction includes learning select choreographic material. A wide range of styles and creative approaches 
will provide students with a diverse palette of choreography that challenges students’ range of adaptability. Students will 
learn about each choreographer’s background, historic context, scope of work, and aesthetic development. Emphasis is 
placed on the role a dancer must play to actualize each selected choreographer’s vision and concept. 

HHP 311   Hip Hop V 

3 credits 

A continuation of HHP 221, this course further develops the student’s proficiency in their technique and stylistic 
approach to Hip Hop movement on an intermediate/advanced I level. Emphasis on dynamics, texture, self-expression, 
performance and more complex rhythms. Prerequisite: HHP 221. 

HHP 321   Hip Hop VI 

3 credits 

A continuation of HHP 311, this course furthers develops the cultural, historical and practical knowledge Hip Hop 
dance aesthetic with technique and individual creativity on an intermediate/advanced II level. Students will learn to execute 
movement while maintaining musicality and individual self-expression. 

HHP 401   Hip Hop Improvisation/Freestyle I 

2 credits 

This course is an introduction to Improvisation/Freestyle as a foundation for Hip Hop dance forms. Coursework 
provides methods and practice in improvisation/freestyle that challenge student’s abilities to create and perform original 
works  spontaneously,  without  any  preplanning.  The  instructor  will  provide  structure  parameters  that  direct  students 
towards conscious movement choices in the most authentic and inventive manner. 

HHP 402   Hip Hop Improvisation/Freestyle II 

2 credits 

This  course  will  introduce  students  to  the  concept  of  “freestyle”  where  dancers  move  one  at  a  time,  creating 
spontaneously in a “cypher” setting. This course will strengthen students’ improvisation skills within a street dance context. 

HHP 411   Hip Hop VII Street Jazz 

3 credits 

This is a choreography-based class with movement influenced from Hip Hop dance forms and Street Jazz dance. This 
course covers the full scope of commercial dance and give dancers the necessary tools to maintain their individuality while 
working in both the context of the choreography, and the industry. The class will incorporate readings, documentaries, 
videos, lectures and discussions on topics in the dance industry. 

HHP 421   Hip Hop VIII 

3 credits 

This course will explore Hip Hop in all its various dance forms along with Street Jazz. This class will expand and 

317 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengthen students’ readiness to enter the world of dance. The student will work on choreography, musicality, and their 
ability to perform. The class will incorporate suggestive readings, documentaries, videos, lectures and discussions in various 
topics  and  dance  forms.  Students  will  be  challenged  and  encouraged  to  understand  and  apply  historical  and  practical 
knowledge of Hip-Hop dance through movement and written forms. 

HIST – HISTORY 

HIST 201    Western Civilization I 

3 credits 

This introductory survey course will familiarize students with major themes and historical events in the Western World 
from the Ancient World to the 1500s. Students will analyze the major forces, ideas and institutions which influenced the 
peoples of the world and look at the foundations of Western cultural expansion outward. In this course students will learn 
to  think  critically  about  historical  events  and  how  they  are  interpreted  to  better  understand  the  relationship  between 
historical events and contemporary interpretation of those events. Students will locate and evaluate primary and secondary 
texts and use them to write critically about history.  

HIST 202    Western Civilization II 

3 credits 

This introductory survey course will familiarize students with major themes and historical events in the Western World 
from the 1500s to the twenty-first century. Student will analyze the major forces, ideas and institutions which influenced 
the peoples of the world and examine the impact of Western cultural imperialism. In this course students will learn to 
think critically about historical events and how they are interpreted to better understand the relationship between historical 
events and contemporary interpretation of those events. Students will located and evaluate primary and secondary texts 
and use them to write critically about history. 

HIST 203    History of the United States I 

3 credits 

The  historical,  political  and  social  movements  of  the  United  States  and  Pennsylvania  from  the  Colonial  period 
through  1865.  The  identification  of  individual  rights  and  responsibilities  as  citizens  is  an  integral  part  of  this  course. 
Prerequisite:  History 150 or permission of the instructor. 

HIST 204    History of the United States II 

3 credits 

A continuation of HIST 203. The developments in the United States and Pennsylvania from 1865 to the present. 

Prerequisite:  History 150 or permission of the instructor. Prerequisite:  History 150 or permission of the instructor. 

HIST 206    Foundations in Feminism: Women’s History in the Western World 

3 credits 

This course will introduce students to historical issues and questions about gender, power, and the role of women in 
modern society. This course will focus on American and European women in the 19th and 20th centuries to understand 
the debates about first, second, and third-wave feminism. Students will read and analyze how the roles of women, gender, 
and sexuality have been (mis)understood and continually redefined in the past two centuries. Students will be introduced 
to the process of writing through the lens of women and feminism. This course is Writing Intensive. 

HIST 215    French Culture 

3 credits 

The  history  and  contemporary  life  of  France  and  the  French-speaking  world.  Provides  an  introduction  to  French 
culture through selected texts, current newspaper clippings and videos. Presented in English. Prerequisite:  History 150 or 
permission of the instructor. Dual listed as FREN 215. 

HIST 216    Spanish Culture 

 3 credits 

An introduction to the culture and history of Spain from the medieval era to the present day. Selected historical and 
literary  texts  are  used  to  give  a  panoramic  view  of  Spanish  culture.  Presented  in  English.  Prerequisite:  History  150  or 
permission of the instructor. Dual listed as SPAN 216. 

HIST 220  History of American Music 

3 credits 

In this course, students will learn about the history and development of American musical styles and the interaction 
that those styles had with American culture. Students will analyze both a variety of genres that evolved during the last one 
hundred and fifty years and the technology and venues that allowed those musical styles to permeate society. The role of 
the musician as the creator of new styles from vaudeville to Broadway and from blues to Rock ‘n’ Roll will dovetail with 
the audience and critics’ response to those genres. During the semester, students will have the opportunity to listen to 
different styles of music, read history of how musical styles evolved, and read both musicians and critics analyses of their 
works.   

318 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HIST 255   Military History 

3 credits 

This survey course will introduce students to military history from ancient times through the end of the 20th 
century. Attention will be given to significant battles throughout time with a focus on key American wars. Students will 
analyze why nations go to war, discuss the role of changing technology in warfare, and assess the impact of war on 
populations. No prior knowledge of military history is required for this course. 

HIST/SOC 263  World History: Central and South America  

3 credits 

The  development  of  the  political,  economic,  social  and  cultural history  of  Latin  America  since  the revolution  for 

independence. Prerequisites: HIST 203, HIST 204 or permission. 

HIST 311    Ancient History 

3 credits 

Near Eastern civilization from the Neolithic period to the Persian Empire. Athenian and Roman power emphasized.  

HIST 322    Renaissance and Reformation 

3 credits 

The economic, social, cultural, political and religious impact of the Renaissance and Reformation in early modern 

history. Prerequisites: HIST 201, HIST 202 or permission. 

HIST 327    Twentieth Century Europe 

3 credits 

Europe from World War I to the present, including the most recent upheavals in Eastern Europe and the former 

Soviet Union. Prerequisites: HIST 201, HIST 202 or permission. 

HIST 337    Adolf Hitler and Nazism 

3 credits 

A study of both the long- and short-range forces which brought Hitler and Nazism to power in Germany. Examines 
the  structure,  style  and  operations  of  the  Nazi  system  from  its  inception  to  its  collapse.  Prerequisite:  HIST  201  or 
permission. 

HIST 355     World War II         

3 credits 

General  course  on  the  history  of  World  War  II.    The  course  will  address  causes  of  the  War,  political  and  social 
dynamics of the War, issues related to the conduct of the War, political and social implications of the War, and the onset 
of the Cold War.   

HIST 358   History of the Modern Middle East 

3 credits 

This course will introduce students to the history of the Middle East. It will cover the life of Muhammad and the 
foundations of Islam. The majority of the course will focus on the 19th and early 20th century and the interaction between 
the  Ottoman  Empire  and  the  European  powers.  This  course  will  give  students  an  opportunity  to  analyze  the  political 
misunderstandings that emerged in the region due to a lack of social and cultural awareness of difference. 

HIST 362  American Decades: Topics 

3 credits 

This course is an in-depth examination of key individuals, events, and cultural expressions in American history with a 
singular 10 year focus. Each decade will be researched for evidence of influence from the previous decade and responsibility 
for trends in the following decade. American political and social issues combined with individual stories will provide the 
historical narrative of the decade. This course will have a significant multicultural dimension. 

HIST 372    History of the American Revolution 

3 credits 

The  causes  and  consequences  of  the  American  Revolution,  including  an  examination  of  the  Declaration  of 

Independence, Articles of Confederation and the Constitution. Prerequisite: HIST 203 or permission. 

HIST 373    Old South, Civil War and Reconstruction 

3 credits 

America from the Compromise of 1850 to the end of Reconstruction. Emphasis on slavery as an institution and on 
the battles and leaders of the Civil War. Reconstruction and its impact on Black America. Prerequisites: HIST 203, HIST 
204 or permission. 

HIST 378    The United States Since World War I 

3 credits 

A study of the period’s major social, political, economic, diplomatic and military developments. Prerequisite: HIST 

204 or permission. 

319 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HIST 382   History of Pennsylvania: Focus on Pittsburgh 

3 credits  

A survey of the changing face of Pennsylvania from the colonial times to the present, with an emphasis on Pittsburgh 
and  Western  Pennsylvania.    This  course  addresses  historical,  political,  military,  and  economic  developments  in  the 
Commonwealth. Writing-in-disciplines class. Prerequisite:  History 150 or permission of the instructor. 

HIST 412  Seminar in History 

3 credits 

This course allows students to synthesize the work they've done in their majors through directed research, evaluation, 
and writing.  Students will write a substantive academic paper which analyzes a specific research question that they will 
choose early in the semester.  Students will read examples of different types of scholarship in their fields including academic 
abstracts, introductions to monographs, and academic journal articles as examples of the types of work they will be writing.  
Students will have the opportunity to revise and review peer's work to ground their own skills.  Prerequisite: Senior standing. 

HIST 418   The History of Money 

3 credits 

Exchange relations have been part of human interactions for thousands of years. This course examines the history of 
such relations and the role of money as a medium of exchange. We will discuss the socio-cultural and the political-economic 
aspects of this history. Our journey will take us from the days of beads, shells and trinkets to present day uses of money in 
modern society. 

HIST 455   History Practicum 

3 credits 

This course is available to qualified students as a practicum within the University or in conjunction with an external 
agency. It prepares students for careers in their field by involving them in professional work under the supervision of faculty 
of staff members. This requires regular progress reports and a final paper. Prerequisite:  Junior status; 3.0 GPA; consent of 
an instructor to act as a supervisor; acceptance by an agency if applicable. 

HIST 194, HIST  294       Special Topics                                                                  3 credits 

HIST 295, HIST 395, HIST 495  Special Topics in  History I, II, III 
(See Department Requirements for a partial list of History courses offered as special topics.  

1-6 credits 

HIST 296, HIST 396, HIST 496 Independent Study in History I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

HON – HONORS PROGRAM 

HON 299   Honors Service Learning 

1 credit 

Students will contribute meaningful service to Point Park University and/or to local community organizations through 
at least 16-20 hours in a service project or activity that connects to the co-requisite course objectives in either UNIV 101 or 
in or a separate section of this class. Students will begin their work with a research assignment, participate in group and 
individual projects, and then keep a journal or written log of their activities to fulfill all obligations agreed upon with the 
faculty member teaching the course and on-site supervisor(s). This will include, but not be limited to, reflection pa- pers 
and appropriate post-project essays. 

HON 399   Honors Experiential Learning 

1 credit 

Students will engage in a minimum of 16-20 hours of professional activity and development related to an attached 
course or professional experience of their choosing. Students may serve as writing, teaching, research, or lab assistants to 
professors.  Students  may  also  study  abroad  or  within  the  U.S.,  or complete  other  study with  the  purpose  of  obtaining 
experiences relevant to their careers and professions. 

HON 499   Honors Capstone 

1 credit 

Students will expand upon and transform their major capstone projects to an Honors Thesis or Honors Project. This 
will include additional interdisciplinary elements from the core curriculum, appropriate academic or professional rigor to 
further their careers, and students will be provided the opportunity to communicate their work in a professional setting 
with required presentations. 

320 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HRM – HUMAN RESOURCES MANAGEMENT 

HRM 205    People and the Environment 

3 credits 

This  course  provides  the  students  with  a  comprehensive  experience  of  business  through  an  exploration  of  the 
foundations of ethical leadership and decision making; inclusion, and belonging initiatives and practices; an understanding 
of  organizational  behavior  at  the  individual,  group,  process,  and  organizational  level;  an  in-depth  exploration  of  HR 
practices as applied to business, and an overarching in depth understanding of the factors, forces, and context of a global 
world. Competencies developed: HR Expertise, Business Acumen, Leadership & Navigation, Relationship Management, 
Communication, Ethical Practices, Inclusion & Diversity. 

HRM 207    Human Resources Management 

3 credits 

Overview of HR functions with a focus on: recruitment and selection processes, performance appraisal systems, and 

compensation & benefit systems, EEOC compliance, employee relations and discipline Prerequisites: PSYC 150. 

HRM 215    Human Capital 

3 credits 

The study of psychological principles used in Human Resource Management. The course will provide the student with 
a working knowledge of individual and group levels of organizational behavior and how to effectively manage the various 
types of behavior within an organizational setting. Topics explored in the course include, but are not limited to, individual 
and group behavior, organizational culture and structure, and processes as they relate to performance and satisfaction in 
organizations. Topics under discussion at the individual level will include: attitudes, personalities, perception, motivation, 
diversity,  and  ethics.  Topics  under  discussion  at  the  group  level  will  include:  organizational  culture  and  structure, 
communication, decision making processes, conflict management, change, and stress, and group dynamics. Competencies 
developed: Business Acumen, Leadership & Navigation, Relationship Management, Communication, Ethical Practices, 
Inclusion & Diversity. Dual listed with PSYC 215. Prerequisite: PSYC 150. 

HRM 220    Employee Life Cycle 

3 credits 

An  in-depth  examination  of  HR  functions  and  competencies  critical  for  successful  navigation,  design  and 
implementation  of  effective  practices  in  an  employee’s  life  cycle.  Functions  explored  include  but  are  not  limited  to, 
recruitment,  selection,  onboarding,  performance  management  and  evaluation,  training  and  development,  career 
development, and separation. Regulations and other legal considerations within the employee life cycle; EEOC, OSHA, 
FLSA,  etc.  will  be  examined.  Competencies  developed:  HR  Expertise,  Business  Acumen,  Leadership  &  Navigation, 
Relationship Management, Communication, Ethical Practices, Inclusion & Diversity. 

HRM 305   Regulations in the Workplace 

3 credits 

Covers  major  employment,  labor  and  discrimination  laws  and  regulations  governing  the  workplace.  Develops  an 
understanding of the practical application of workplace regulations on day-to-day human resources operations and ways to 
minimize a company’s exposure to lawsuits and charges with emphases on case study discussion, practical examples and use 
of extensive resource materials. SHRM Competencies will be addressed in this course including but not limited to HR 
Expertise and Critical Evaluation. Prerequisite: BMGT 201. 

HRM 316   Labor and Management Relations 

3 credits 

This course reviews the history and evolution of American labor unions, including industrial relations problems. The 
course will explore the concept of collective bargaining by focusing on the formation of labor unions, the passing of the 
National  Labor  Relations  Act,  and  the  development  of  subsequent  labor  laws.  The  components  of  a  labor  agreement, 
including the relative positions of management and the union in negotiations, will be discussed. U.S. employment law will 
also be covered. Prerequisite: HRM 220. 

HRM 318   Experiential Learning Experience in Human Resource Management 
        An Experiential Learning Experience (ELE) enables the student to demonstrate their ability to apply knowledge and 
theory learned in the classroom. ELE also provides skill development through professional initiatives. Project based ELE is 
a common development tool used in many organizations. Students will build valuable experiences through projects and 
special  initiatives  within  an  organization  or  community.  This  course  requires  students  to  complete  a  project  or  special 
initiative that exemplifies the application of HR best practices. The student will provide weekly updates to the instructor 
and a final paper. Students must be approved prior to the beginning of their experience. This is a Pass/Fail course. Course 
Prerequisites: HRM 220. Students must have completed at least 60 credit hours ( jr class standing). Transfer students must 
have completed at least one semester at PPU. Students only earn credit for the ELE during the semester it is completed. 
Experiential Learning Experience must be approved by the Director of the HR Management program. 

                 3 credits 

HRM 319   Current Topics in Human Resources Management 
       In-depth study into current topics that impact how organizations properly address and manage HR processes, thereby 

                                         3 credits 

321 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enabling the organization to obtain desired goals and address sustainability. The SHRM competency of Global and 
Cultural Effectiveness will be included in the course content. Prerequisite: HRM 220 

                                                                                               3 credits 

HRM 320    HR Data Analysis 
        HR Data Analysis will investigate and evaluate the various systems and tools commonly used by organizations to extract 
and  analyze  data,  and  in  strategic  organizational  decision-making  to  enhance  organizational  success  and  sustainability. 
Students  will  examine  and  develop  the  skills  required  to  extract  and  analyze  HR  data.  Students  will  apply  these  newly 
developed skills to analyze the impact on organizational success, strategic decision-making, and sustainability. The SHRM 
competency, Critical Evaluation, and Analytical Aptitude will be included in the course content. Prerequisites: MATH 175, 
MATH 180, CMPS 101, CMPS 163. 

HRM 330  Compensation and Benefits  

3 credits 

Covers  compensation  theory  and  the  major  employment  and  labor  laws  and  regulations  affecting  compensation. 
Topics include, but are not limited to, defined benefit/defined contribution retirement programs and fringe benefit plans. 
SHRM Competencies will be addressed in this course including but not limited to HR Expertise. Prerequisite: HRM 220 

HRM 342    Research Methods in a Business Environment  
    This course explores various qualitative and quantitative research methods, experimental controls, data analysis, and 
scientific communication used in a business environment. Upon completion of the course, students will know how to 
formulate  research  questions,  select  the  appropriate  research  methodology,  collect  and  analyze  data,  and  communicate 
findings and recommendations. The SHRM competencies will be addressed in this course, including but not limited to 
Critical Evaluation. Dual listed with BMGT 342 and MKTS 342. Pre-requisite: MATH 175. 

3 credits 

HRM 416    Strategic Human Resource Management 
        This  course  delves  into  HR  processes  from  a  strategic  level.  Focus  will  be  on  Human  Resource  Management  as  a 
Business Partner for the design and implementation of organizational processes to achieve corporate goals and improve 
efficiencies. Topics under discussion include: workforce planning, labor forecasting, talent management, HR technology, 
metrics and analytics, onboarding, succession planning and strategic HR. The SHRM competencies, consultation, business 
acumen, and leadership and navigation, will be included in the course content. Prerequisite: HRM 220, HRM 320, HRM 
330 

                                                              3 credits 

HRM 420    SHRM CP Professional Certification Prep (Capstone) 

3 credits 

This course is the capstone course taken by all Human Resource Management majors. The course is structured as a 
comprehensive process that allows students to synthesize all Human Resources knowledge, competencies and capabilities 
learned during their academic career. The course will encompass all areas required by the Human Resource professional 
certifying bodies, HRCI, and SHRM for academic alignment. Knowledge, competencies, and capabilities are categorized 
into three areas people, organizations, and the workplace. Prerequisites: HRM 316, HRM 416. 

HUMA – HUMANITIES 

HUMA 405  Interdisciplinary Studies Practicum 

3 credits 

This course requires a semester-long commitment to a program, organization, or group in one of the student’s chosen 
academic disciplines. Students contribute the critical thinking, communication, and research skills learned in one of their 
academic disciplines to help that organization reach the goals of their mission statement. Students work with the appointed 
faculty  member  on  their  project  as  well  as  the  Interdisciplinary  Studies  faculty  advisor.  The  work  completed  for  the 
organization should be equivalent to 3 hours per week for a 15-week term. The course culminates in a student portfolio 
that showcases their work in the practicum (e.g., professional writing, presentations, PR materials, etc.). Also, students write 
a final reflective paper discussing their goals, objectives, challenges, recommendations, and an overall consideration of how 
the semester-long endeavor contributed to their educational experience. Students will be encouraged to share their work 
with the broader university community at the annual LCS symposium in the Spring. 

HUMA 496  Senior Seminar Thesis Project 

3 credits 

The Capstone Senior Thesis allows students to synthesize the work they have done in their majors through directed 
research, evaluation, and writing. Students will write a substantive academic paper that analyzes a specific research question 
they will choose early in the semester. Students will read examples of different types of scholarship in their fields, which 
may include academic abstracts and journal articles, historical documents, interviews, case law, government documents, 
statistical data, quantitative analyses, and numerous other primary and secondary sources for both research purposes and 
as examples of the types of work they will be writing. Students will work closely with a faculty mentor, including revision 

322 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunity, as they build their paper and hone their research skills. 

INES – INTERNATIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES 

INES 175      Introduction to International Studies    

3 credits 

An  introduction  to  the  critical  analysis  of  contemporary  global  cultural  circumstances  with  special  emphasis  on 
developing an appreciation of the complex character of human cultural patterns the world over as well as a global perspective 
on the dynamics of power and privilege. 

INES 210   Global Climate Politics                                                                               
        This course is an introduction to the politics concerning a warming planet—impacts, mitigations, and adaptations. 
Students will study ideas and theories that explain what is getting in the way of dealing with this existential threat. Effects 
of climate change around the world and political efforts to address these effects—from international cooperation to local 
struggles for climate justice—will also be studied. 

3 credits 

INES 240   The South African Anti-Apartheid Movement                                                     
       This course explores the political geographies of South Africa from the establishment of apartheid in 1948 to the 
present post-apartheid age. Students will examine geographic studies and primary source material to discover the ways in 
which various global processes have woven their way into South Africa’s landscapes over the past seventy years, and in turn, 
how South Africa's political geographies have impacted global markets, politics, and practices. The first half of the course 
will take a detailed look at how the white-minority South African government geographically implemented and maintained 
apartheid according to a colonial logic of racial capitalism. The second half of the course will focus upon ways in which 
South Africans, Africans in neighboring states, and the broader international community organized to resist, and eventually 
end,  apartheid.  The  course  will  thus  serve  as  an  historical  case  study  of  a  relatively  successful  organizing  and  advocacy 
campaign for social justice. 

3 credits 

INES 260   Strike! Boycott! Divest for Social Justice!                                                                              3 credits 
        Students will learn how to use economic tools to advocate for various social justice causes. The course will focus on 
how strategies such as shareholder activism, boycott campaigns, divestiture, and worker solidarity campaigns, among other 
tools, can put economic pressure on companies and governments to change their policies. A combination of historical case 
studies and hypothetical scenarios will illustrate how these tools work on the ground. 

INES 300   Gentrification                                                                               
        This course explores the ongoing process of gentrification by which much of the landscape of late Capitalism is being 
refashioned. The course will address various approaches to the describing/explaining gentrification, encompassing a wider-
range of both production-side and consumption-side analyses, as well as hybrid approaches; in addition, the course will 
attend to the class-based, gendered, racial, and lifestyle aspects of varying forms of gentrification. 

3 credits 

INES 305   Cocaine, Coffee, Chocolate                                                                               
        This seminar is an interdisciplinary course devoted to the intensive study of commodity chain analysis, with a focus 
on select commodities (e.g., Cocaine, Coffee, and Chocolate). Students will develop an understanding of how to investigate 
the  social  and  ecological  relations  embedded  in  things  that  we as  a  society  use  and  consume  and throw away. Student 
learning will culminate in a research proposal and/or paper. Topics may vary by semester. 

3 credits 

INES 325   Global Political Economy                                                                                  
      This course will survey and investigate the sociocultural dimensions of global political economy, as a comprehensive 
and systematic approach to understanding of the roots of many of the world's dynamics of inequality. In the process we will 
interrogate the , analytically distinct but practically intertwined , historical processes associated with the Enlightenment, 
(European) colonialism, and capitalism, as well as their profound and lasting repercussions on the contemporary world. 
Prerequisite: SJS 150 or SJS 175 

3 credits 

INES 340   Global Political Ecology                                                                                  

3 credits 

A study of the relationship of humans to the environments they inhabit with special attention paid to the political-
economic structures that inform those relationships; of particular interest will be the character of capitalism and the extent 
to which it is implicated in the ongoing environmental change on local and global scales. Prerequisite: INES 175 

323 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INES 390   Study Abroad I                                                                               

3 credits 

INES 426   International and Environmental Studies Thesis Capstone                                              3 credits 
    The  senior  capstone  thesis  for  International  and  Environmental  (INES)  majors  allows  students  to  conduct  original 
research and write a thesis on a topic in International Studies and/or Environmental Studies. Under the guidance of a 
faculty supervisor, students will collect and analyze data and will write a thesis in the format of a peer-reviewed journal 
article. Upon completion of a full draft of the thesis, students will orally present their research to the university community. 

INTL – INTELLIGENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY 

INTL 101 

Introduction to Intelligence 

3 credits 

The origins of collecting, assimilating, and using intelligence from the Spartans through the present will be discussed 

in detail in order to lay a foundation for today’s methods and analysis of intelligence. 

INTL 102   Intelligence Tradecraft Techniques  

3 credits 

This course will present information on the degree of planning and the preparation methods used by terrorists prior 
to an attack.  Emphasis is on the planning and preparation stages of the attack, the time when terrorists are most susceptible 
to  law  enforcement  detection.  Included  in  this  course  will  be  an  extensive  familiarization  of  the  jargon  utilized  by  the 
intelligence community and their research methods. 

INTL 103   International Terrorism 

3 credits 

This course will focus on the origins of terrorism by identifying know organizations, their perceived structure, and 
their degree of operational capacity.  Inclusive in this course will be the Method of Operation (MO) an the tell-tale signs to 
look  for  when  attempting  to  identify  such  organizations  in  urban,  suburban,  and  rural  areas.  The  course  will  describe 
known or suspected creeds followed by several terrorist organizations. 

INTL 104   Recruitment, Preparation and Training of Terrorists  

3 credits 

This course will describe the recruitment, preparation, and training of terrorists including past, current, and future 
initiatives. The course will cover the culture, subculture structure, and growth of terrorist organizations both domestic and 
international. 

INTL 204   Intelligence in the Media  

3 credits 

This course examines the intelligence community and how it is perceived in the movies, television, novels and in the 
news.  Comparisons will be made with what is depicted and the actual event that inspired the media.  Prerequisites: INTL 
101, INTL 102.  

INTL 210   Domestic Terrorism 

3 credits 

This course examines the causes of domestic terrorism. It t explains why people join such organizations and how they 
are recruited. The course relates how these organizations have developed in the U.S. over the past 20 plus years. It explains 
why domestic terrorism has become prevalent and what steps have been taken to curb its growth. It also describes how U.S. 
law enforcement is addressing the problem and what laws have been created to stop its growth and deal with its members. 

INTL 211   Evolution of Intelligence  

3 credits 

This course analyzes the historical development of intelligence services and describes the reason(s) which have resulted 
in the proliferation and need for these services.  It also explores how historical, global, and technological changes have 
impacted the intelligence community. 

INTL 194, INTL 294       Special Topics                                                                   

INTL 300   Critical Thinking for Analysts  

3 credits 

3 credits 

This course lays the foundation for the processes used by the intelligence community to determine credibility of assets 

and acquisition of intelligence prior to placing that intelligence into a matrix or on the link chart. 

INTL 301   Integrated Intelligence Analysis 

3 credits 

This course lays the foundation for the processes used by the intelligence community to determine credibility of assets 
and acquisition of intelligence and the placing of intelligence into link chart for further analysis, merging, and cooperation 
among agencies or in fusion centers. 

324 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTL 302   National Intelligence Authorities 

3 credits 

As a nation of laws, this course covers the laws governing the collection, dissemination and use of intelligence as well 
as defining the 17 agencies in the Intelligence Community; includes a detailed study of the Patriot Act, national Intelligence 
Act and Emergency Powers of the President. 

INTL 304  Critical Issues in Risk Communications 

3 credits 

Course  focuses  on  risk  communication  within  the  context  of  terrorism  and  natural  disasters.  The  didactic  and 
experiential course will include core principles of risk communication, examine special challenges of risk communication 
with  diverse  audiences  and  media,  and  prepare  students  to  create  risk  and  crisis  communication  campaign  in  Risk 
Communication. 

INTL 305     Intelligence Failures 

3 credits 

This course will identify and describe perceived failures of the U.S. Intelligence community over the past 50 plus years, 
which have affected national security and U.S. foreign policy.  The course further explores the laws and amended policies 
that  have  been  implemented  as  a  result  of  these  failures  and  analyzes  the  effect  of  these  changes  on  the  intelligence 
community and foreign policy making. 

INTL 306     Emergency Planning & Security Measures 

3 credits 

This course will deal with the multi-faceted role of Federal, State and local law enforcement authorities in the U.S., 

and their part in the war on terrorism. The course will explore inter-agency degree of cooperation and suggestions for 
improving these roles through real time cooperation and the sharing of intelligence. The FBI Joint Terrorism Task Force 
(JTTF) will be used as a model. 

INTL 310   Ethics of Spying  

3 credits 

This course looks at the dilemmas that exist when someone is asked to perform a civil service that is in conflict with 
what that person believes to be ethical.  Such ethics require and expect an intelligence officer to lie, deceive, steal, launder 
money, and perform a variety of other activities they would certainly be condemned as illegal if practiced in the United 
States.  Prerequisites: INTL 101, INTL 102; PHIL 240.   

INTL 311   Emergency Medical Services and Fire Operations 

3 credits 

This course focuses on the rapid recovery of transportation services; emergency production, transmission, distribution, 
and  telecommunications.  Topics  also  include  restoring  public  and  private  information  systems;  coordinating  plans  for 
medical and financial assistance to victims; stabilizing financial markets; and containing and removing hazardous materials. 

INTL 312   Interrogation Techniques 

3 credits 

This is an online course of study related to techniques of interrogation as used by the intelligence community.  The 
course  will  cover  current  and  past  practices  with  an  emphasis  on  the  new  guidelines  for  interrogating  terrorists  and 
combatants in the current war on terrorism.  Prerequisites: INTL 101, INTL 102, INTL 310.   

INTL 315, INTL 415 Intelligence Internship I, II 

3 credits 

Experiential  component  approved  by  the  department  in  a  local  or  national  agency  focusing  upon  security  and 
intelligence.  Methods  of  evaluation  include  periodic  reports,  journals  and  an-site  evaluations.  Prerequisites:    Junior 
Standing and permission. 

INTL 395   Special Topics in Intelligence 

3 credits 

This course provides the opportunity for the program to offer courses in areas of the major that are not normally 
covered  in  the  regular  curriculum.  It  also  provides  for  dual  listing  of  appropriate  courses  within  other  university 
departments. 

INTL 401   High Impact Event Planning 

 3 credits 

This course deals with the multi-faceted role of Federal, State and local law enforcement authorities in the United 
States and their role in the response to high impact events as described by the Department of Homeland Security. The 
course will explore inter-agency cooperation and strategies for improving collaboration through the use of shared assets. 
Inclusive in this course is a detailed review of the roles of state and local authorities in the event of such an attack. 

INTL 402   Current Issues in U.S. Security Policy 

3 credits 

This course examines, both objectively and subjectively, current issues in U.S. Security Policy both nationally and 
internationally.  Students will compare various national intelligence strategies over a period of time from its inception to 
its current state of affairs. 

325 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTL 403   Weapons of Mass Destruction 

3 credits 

This course will describe chemical, biological and nuclear proliferation among terrorist organizations. The course will 
offer a virtual reality format of instruction in identifying and responding to occurrences where WMD are detected. The 
course will include the protection, detection and response to Dirty Bombs. 

INTL 404    Mass Casualty Management Planning 

3 credits 

This course covers the issues involved in dealing with mass casualties such as those created by major terrorist events, 
pandemics,  nuclear  accidents,  tsunamis,  and  major  earthquakes.  An  examination  of  past  mass  casualty  events  will  be 
studied. 

INTL 405   Counter Intelligence  

3 credits 

This course consists of a comprehensive study of a minimum of four highly placed spies in our intelligence agencies.  
The methods and techniques utilized by the spies as well as the techniques utilized by our counterintelligence agents to 
discover and arrest those spies.  In addition, the damage caused by each will be discussed in detail.  Prerequisites: INTL 
101, INTL 102. 

INTL 406  Methods of Propaganda and Persuasion 

3 credits 

This course explores the many ways that groups and governments have applied methods of propaganda and persuasion 
throughout history in order to modify the behavior of human populations for political, military, economic, and cultural 
ends. Students will examine historical examples of psychological operations and propaganda campaigns from a number of 
different  sources  as  they  analyze  the  patterns  and  techniques  of  target  audience  analysis,  clarification  of  objectives  and 
supporting objectives, selection of appropriate persuasion techniques, creation of persuasive products, and mitigation of 
blowback. Prerequisites: INTL 101, 102. 

INTL 409 

Intelligence Case Studies  

3 credits 

This course will analyze significant de-classified intelligence cases, both military and non-military in nature.  It will 
examine each selected case to evaluate the perceived necessity for the action and the ultimate outcome of the action(s).  It 
also will analyze if policy and perceptions at the time of case initiation were flawed or accurately determined.  

INTL 410 The President’s Daily Brief 

                                                                                    3 credits 

This course is designed to prepare Intelligence students to combine their subject knowledge, analytical abilities, and 
communications skill to prepare documents for use in the Intelligence Community, including Presidential Daily Briefs and 
the five basic types of Intelligence reports; basic information, current reports, evaluative assessments, estimative reports, 
and warning assessments. Additionally, students will hone their speaking skills by delivering oral briefs for a variety of target 
audiences. 

JAZ – JAZZ 

JAZ 101  

Supplemental Jazz I – B.A., Non-Concentration 

1-2 credits 

Introductory Jazz. Develops a basic understanding of jazz dance techniques; styles include classical, contemporary, and 
musical theatre jazz.  Emphasis on proper alignment, placement and coordination. Prerequisite: BA dance major, non-Jazz 
concentration. 

JAZ 102  

Supplemental Jazz II 

1-2 credits 

Develops  a  basic  understanding  of  jazz  dance  techniques  on  a  low  to  intermediate  level.    Styles  include  classical, 
contemporary, and musical theatre jazz.  Emphasis on proper alignment, placement and coordination. Prerequisites: JAZ 
101. 

Jazz I 

JAZ 111  
       Introductory Jazz. Develops a basic understanding of jazz dance techniques; styles include classical, contemporary, and 
musical theatre jazz. Emphasis will be placed on proper anatomical alignment, placement and coordination skills.  Students 
will  learn  about  historic  influences  on  jazz  dance  today  and  develop  an  understanding  of  jazz  dance's  roots  in  African 
Diaspora and evolution of various individual styles. Students will be introduced to social dance and its influence on the 
jazz field today, and exposed to jazz dance presented on Broadway and theater dance. Prerequisite: Freshmen dance major; 
audition. 

3 credits 

326 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jazz II 

JAZ 121  
      Develop  a  basic  understanding  of  jazz  dance  techniques  on  a  low  to  intermediate  level.    Styles  include  classical, 
contemporary,  and  musical  theatre  jazz.    Emphasis  on  proper  alignment,  strength,  placement  and  coordination  skills. 
Develop a deeper understanding of jazz dance history in America. Write and speak about historic jazz dance influences. 
Develop  an  understanding  of  the  jazz  dance  impact  on  current  works  through  concert  dance  and  commercial  dance.  
Prerequisite: JAZ 111. 

3 credits 

JAZ 201  

Supplemental Jazz I 

1-2 credits 

Introductory Jazz. Develops basic understanding of jazz dance techniques; styles include classical, contemporary, and 
musical theatre jazz. Emphasis on proper alignment, placement, and coordination skills. Introduce historic influences on 
jazz dance today. Prerequisite: JAZ 121 

JAZ 202  

Supplemental Jazz II 

1-2 credits 

Develops  a  basic  understanding  of  jazz  dance  techniques  on  a  low  to  intermediate  level.  Styles  include  classical, 
contemporary,  and  musical  theater  jazz.  Emphasis  on  proper  alignment,  strength,  placement,  and  coordination  skills. 
Develop a deeper understanding of jazz history in America. Prerequisite: JAZ 201 

Jazz III 

JAZ 211  
      This  course  continues  the  study  of  JAZ  121  on  an  intermediate  level.    Emphasis  is  placed  on  kinetic  and  spatial 
awareness,  coordination,  phrasing  and  stylistic  versatility.    Develop  understanding  of  musicality  and  dynamics  through 
exposure  to  social and  commercial  styles  of  dance.  Introduce  social  dance  lineage  and  current  impact  on the  industry. 
Develop audition techniques to gain strategies building confidence and execution of material. Introduce concepts of dance 
on film. Prerequisite: JAZ 121 

3 credits 

Jazz IV 

JAZ 221  
      This course continues the study of JAZ 211 on an intermediate level. Emphasis is placed on application of cohesive 
coordination, phrasing, and stylistic versatility. Execute understanding of musicality and dynamics of social and commercial 
styles  of  dance.  Develop  an  understanding  of  social  dances  and  current  influence  on  the  industry.  Develop  audition 
techniques  to  gain  strategies  building  confidence  and  execution  of  material.  Develop  individual  projects  to  present 
introductory concepts of dance on film. Prerequisite: JAZ 211 

3 credits 

JAZ 301  

Supplemental Jazz III 

1-2 credits 

Additional studies in Jazz. Introduce musicality and dynamics through exposure to social and commercial styles of 

dance. Introduce social dance lineage and current impact on the industry.  Prerequisite: JAZ 202. 

JAZ 302  

Supplemental Jazz IV 

1-2 credits 

Additional studies in Jazz. Develop musicality and dynamics through exposure to social and commercial styles of dance. 

Develop skills to execute movement phrases with confidence and artistic style.  Prerequisite: JAZ 301 

Jazz V 

JAZ 311  
        A  continuation  of  JAZ  221,  this  course  further  develops  a  sense  of  individual  style  and  solid  technique  on  an 
intermediate to advanced level.  Individual creativity is encouraged. Introduce arts advocacy and activism concepts. Develop 
group community engagement research projects investigating topics of social, civil, or political impact. Present research 
projects  integrating  message  and  movement  utilizing  narrative,  dance,  music,  film,  and/or  other  mediums.  Develop 
understanding of dance as a vehicle for storytelling and expression. Prerequisite: JAZ 221 

3 credits 

Jazz VI 

JAZ 321  
        A continuation of JAZ 311, this course further develops a sense of individual aesthetic with solid technique on an 
intermediate to advanced level.  Individual creativity is explored and expressed. Develop quick response and adaptive skills 
through dance audition exercises. Develop understanding of personal brand. Explore dance video, photos, and imagery to 
identify a visible and consistent aesthetic for marketing. Adapt movement styles to address specific contexts. Industry genres 
addressed include cruise ship, music video, industrials/events, concert, and theater. Develop confident and memorable 
audition skills. Prerequisite: JAZ 311 

3 credits 

JAZ 401  

Supplemental Jazz V 

1-2 credits 

Additional  studies  in  Jazz.  Develop  a  sense  of  individual  style  integrated  with  technical  foundation.  Individual 
creativity is encouraged. Introduce understanding of dance as a vehicle for storytelling and expression.  Prerequisite: JAZ 
302. 

327 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JAZ 402  

Supplemental Jazz VI 

1-2 credits 

Additional  studies  in  Jazz.  Explore  quick  response  and  adaptive  skills  through  dance  audition  exercises.  Develop 
confident  movement  quality  of  a  wide  range  of  industry  genres  including  cruise  ship,  music  video,  industrials/events, 
concerts, and theater. Individual creativity is explored.  Prerequisite: JAZ 401. 

Jazz VII 

JAZ 411  
       A continuation of JAZ  321, this course is an advanced study of jazz dance techniques.  Technical accomplishment, 
clarity, phrasing, musicality, Individual style and confidence are presented. Develop qualitative and innovative solo phrases 
for dance reel highlights and live audition requirements. Create impressive dance reels featuring individual creative and 
technical strengths.  Prerequisite: JAZ 321. 

3 credits 

Jazz VIII 

JAZ 421  
       A continuation of DANC 411, this course is highest level study of jazz dance techniques.  Technical accomplishment, 
clarity, phrasing, musicality, individual style and confidence are all presented. Students will present consistently industry 
ready material throughout various aspects of styles. Students will create group and solo commercial projects demonstrating 
dynamic, expressive, and proficient dance performance, and present projects for final adjudications. Prerequisite: JAZ 411. 

3 credits 

JOUR – JOURNALISM  

JOUR 191  Practicum in Media Management 

1 credit 

Experience in college media under the supervision of a department faculty member, specifically leading student media 
including magazines, The Globe, WPPJ Radio, or U-View. Must hold a management position. May be taken 3 times, and 
may only be registered for if the position receives no other credit compensation. Course is offered on a pass/fail basis only. 
Course may substitute for JOUR 311; otherwise, course may only count towards student’s General Electives Requirement. 

JOUR 225   Deconstructing the Story 

3 credits 

This course is critical-analytic, designed to serve as an introduction to the practice of media literacy through the close 
reading of media texts.  Students will survey the major schools of analytic thought in the cultural-critical tradition and apply 
them to the popular media in order to be able to identify and discuss major themes depicted in the texts.  Each instructor 
who teaches the course is free to choose the genre of media, as well as the major themes students will identify and discuss.  
The main framework for media text analysis will remain consistent across all iterations of the course. 

JOUR 257  Feature and Interpretive Writing  

3 credits 

A lecture-laboratory and personal conference course in the writing of feature stories and analytical perspectives for 
newspapers,  magazines  and  online,  ranging  from  personality  profiles  and  social  trends  to  interpretive  and  contextual 
reporting.  Prerequisite: COMM 115. 

JOUR 260  Newsgathering and Reporting 

    3 credits 

This course offers advanced training in reporting techniques, record searches, computer-assisted research, journalistic 
style, and other skills.  After students learn how to find interesting stories, they will be schooled in specific writing structures 
and how to organize, write, and publish stories for a portfolio that will be presented at the end of the semester. Prerequisite: 
COMM 115. 

JOUR 272   Culture & Entertainment Journalism 

3 credits 

This course will introduce students to the craft of arts and entertainment journalism, including profiles, previews, 
reviews and critiques, microblogging, long-form pieces, and entertainment features across a variety of entertainment media, 
including media, film, theater, dance, and fine art, among others. Students will learn to translate these works across a variety 
of  media  platforms,  including  social  media.  During  the  course  of  the  semester,  students  will  also  explore  strategies  for 
establishing  media  industry  contacts  to  obtain  interviews,  access  to  samples,  previews,  and  rehearsals,  as  well  as  media 
content that would accompany their journalistic work. Methodologies for selling work to arts and entertainment markets 
will also be discussed. Prerequisites: COMM 115, JOUR 260 OR MULT 220, PRAD 321 

JOUR 302  Photojournalism I 
         Photojournalism students will learn the basic skills, theory and history to obtain and report with a camera under 
deadline  conditions.    Assignments  will  be within the university  and  extend  into  the  community.   An  emphasis  will  be 
placed on students publishing assignments to begin portfolios.  Critiques will be an integral part of the course.  Prerequisite:  
PHOT 205, COMM 215, or permission. 

3 credits 

328 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOUR 304   Broadcast News Reporting 
      This class functions as a multimedia newsroom and produces content for some or all of WPPJ, U-View, the Point Park 
News Service, and a weekly newscast. Students write and edit broadcast news packages to deadline, record news in the field, 
refine  broadcast  presentation  skills,  and  employ  reporting  and  interviewing  techniques  for  a  variety  of  situations  in 
broadcast news. Prerequisites: JOUR 260 

3 credits 

JOUR 312  Advanced Reporting 

3 credits 

This is an advanced-level writing and reporting and storytelling class for dedicated students.  The focus of the class is 
reporting and writing and communicating in a simulated professional environment, drawing upon all the skills learned in 
prior required and elective courses.  Students will report for the Point Park News Service and create multimedia projects.  
Content created in this class appears on the news service website under the students’ bylines.  Their work will be offered 
for publication in media outlets through the news service.  Prerequisites:  JOUR 260 or permission of the instructor.  

JOUR 314   Entrepreneurial Reporting 

 3 credits 

Students will learn to work in an ever-changing media environment that has affected traditional media platforms, 
freelance journalists and communicators, and media entrepreneurs.  Students will research new media ventures – including 
efforts in traditional media outlets and online platforms – and nonprofit journalism.  Media pioneers will address the class, 
explaining their media companies and career paths as well as their utilization of innovative platforms to reach audiences.  
The class will include a review of copyright, legal and ethical issues, business planning and finance.  Students will propose 
and  develop  their  own  media  businesses  or  nonprofit  ventures  throughout  the  course.    Prerequisite:  JOUR  260  or 
permission of the instructor. 

JOUR 315   Photojournalism II 

 3 credits 

Photojournalism  students  will  refine  their  photo  reporting  skills  while  expanding  techniques  to  include  visual 
storytelling and documenting with emerging technology.  Students must be published.  An emphasis will be placed on 
students publishing assignments to further portfolios.  Critiques will be an integral part of the course.  Prerequisite:  PHOT 
204, PHOT 205, COMM 215 or permission. 

JOUR 317   On Camera Television Performance  

  3 credits 

Experiential training to develop “on screen” presentation skills through practice of performance techniques in various 

television formats. Prerequisite: COMM 215 or permission. 

JOUR 324  Broadcast Announcing 
Practice in the skills of basic performance and broadcast styles with an overview of the responsibilities required for 
radio and television announcing. Practical performance situations designed to develop proficiency are required.  

3 credits 

JOUR 340   Point Park News Service 
     Students will develop the reporting and writing skills required of professional journalists across all types of media. The 
course  will  place  students  into  real-world  reporting  situations  and  give  them  opportunities  to  identify  and  incorporate 
primary sources, analyze complex information, and generate original journalistic content. Students will understand and 
apply rules of grammar, AP style, journalism ethics across distinct types of story structure to convey fact-based narratives. 

3 credits 

JOUR 406   Public Affairs Reporting 

3 credits 

Review of functions and structures of government and other public agencies with attention to special problems of 

obtaining and reporting information in news articles. Prerequisites: JOUR 260. Dual listed as JOUR 506.  

JOUR 409   Specialized Reporting 

3 credits 

Students will obtain experience in a number of specialized or traditional beat reporting areas by completing reporting 
assignments under deadline conditions. Range of topics to include business, education, science, sports, etc. Prerequisites: 
JOUR 260.  Dual listed as JOUR 509. 

JOUR 410   Data and Investigative Journalism 

3 credits 

Practical  reporting  experience  with  heavy  emphasis  on  investigative  techniques  and  computer-assisted  reporting; 
development  of  sources  and  information;  determination  of  subjects,  organization  and  writing  of  stories  and  series  for 
newspaper and online media publication. Students in this course will learn to tell stories that being with datasets, either 
locally  created  or  widely  available.  They  will  scrape,  clean,  analyze,  and  then  communicate  the  information  stored  in 
databases through words, images, and interactive modalities. Dual listed as JOUR 510. Prerequisites: JOUR 260 or MULT 
220.  

329 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOUR 414   Multiplatform Magazine Reporting I 

3 credits 

Students  apply  management,  news  writing,  feature  writing,  copy  editing,  desktop  publishing,  photography,  and 
advertising skills learned in other School of Communication classes to produce an online magazine.  Students will engage 
in multiplatform journalism, working in multiple media modalities.  Prerequisite: JOUR 260 or instructor permission. 

JOUR 415   Multiplatform Magazine Reporting II 

3 credits 

Students will further develop and apply management, news writing, feature writing, copy editing, desktop publishing, 
photography,  and  advertising  skills  learned  in  their  first  semester  of  multiplatform  magazine  reporting.    Advanced 
publication and management  skills will be expected through serving as Editor, Copy Editor, Photo Editor, Advertising 
Manager,  Designer,  or  On-line  Editor.    Students  will  engage  in  multiplatform  journalism,  working  in  multiple  media 
modalities.  Prerequisite:  JOUR 414 or instructor permission. 

JOUR 424   Advanced Broadcast Announcing 

3 credits 

Designed  to  meet  the  needs  of  those  students  who  desire  to  pursue  careers  as  on-air  talent  in  broadcasting.  The 
emphasis is on actual performance with every student spending considerable time behind a microphone or in front of a 
camera. They are shown advanced techniques or “tricks” used by veteran broadcasters. Criticism from the instructor and 
from professionals is an integral part of the course. Prerequisites: JOUR 324. 

JOUR 445  Editing & Producing the News 

3 credits 

Traditional and transitional principles of news value, news selection, and news presentation will be discussed in class. 
Applying these principles, students will serve as gatekeepers and decision makers (assignment editors, chief photographers, 
web producers, head writers, segment producers, anchors and program producers) for a weekly newscast and other student 
multimedia  news  efforts.  The  instructor  and  students  will  discuss  journalistic,  ethical,  legal,  societal  and  professional 
perspectives and challenges presented by these real-world journalistic decisions. Prerequisite: JOUR 304. 

JOUR 446   History of Documentary Cinema 
       In the course students will review the history of documentary film and profile innovative documentary filmmakers. 
Students  will  view  and  analyze  major  works  within  the  context  of  major  film  theories,  as  well  as  a  wide  variety  of 
documentary archetypes, styles, and methods. The films and filmmakers profiled in the course represent a diverse sampling 
of modern world cultures. This course is cross-listed with CINE 301 and JOUR 546. 

3 credits 

JOUR 465   Mass Communication History 
      This course details the development of journalism in print, electronic, and digital media from international roots 
through the developmental history of the profession, primarily in the United States. Business (advertising and 
subscription), noncommercial and other models of support for news gathering and dissemination will be traced and 
analyzed. Development of the philosophical construct of free speech will be explored, as will the role and significance of 
free expression to politics, governance, social systems, cultural expression, diversity, and economic activity. 

3 credits  

JOUR 490   Journalism Capstone 

3 credits 

Students apply their cumulative skills in the creation of long-form, well-researched, multiple-source journalism for web 
and/or  multiplatform  delivery.    During  the  course,  students  work  in  consultation  with  the  instructor  to  create  their 
individual  projects.    Students  also  finalize  their  individual  portfolios  that  includes  the  projects  created  for  this  class.  
Prerequisite: Senior Standing. 

JOUR 194, JOUR 294        Special Topics                                                               

JOUR 295, JOUR 395, JOUR 495  Special Topics I, II, III 

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

Courses  on  subjects  currently  at  issue  or  of  interest  to  faculty/students  and  the  media.  Examples  may  be  trends, 
experimental topics, integrated fields, new technologies or important areas not covered by previously listed courses, such as 
multiculturalism, informational graphics or audio-visual techniques. Topics are selected by the department with regard to 
student/faculty input and current perceived needs. 

JOUR 296, JOUR 396, JOUR 496  Independent Study I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

The student independently studies subjects in the field not taught but of special interest to her or him and within the 
expertise  of  a  supervising  faculty  member.  A  well-developed,  written  proposal  from  the  student  and  agreement  of  an 
appropriate faculty supervisor are needed before registration. A final research paper or project is required. Prerequisite:  
Permission of faculty supervisor and chair. 

330 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEAD – LEADERSHIP 

LEAD 110   Introduction to the Study of Leadership 

3 credits 

Lays the foundation for an academic study of leadership as a process in organizations. Key terms, concepts and theories 
are presented and examined to serve as tools for subsequent analysis and application. Considerable attention is given to 
the historical evolution of leadership as a focus of study as well as individual, situational, transactional and transformational 
approaches. 

LEAD 140   Leadership Skills  

 3 credits 

Provides students with feedback on their own leadership style through leadership instruments, exercises and feedback. 
Course will include measurement and skill development in personality, critical thinking, decision-making, communication, 
conflict-management, contingency leadership (LPC), and other key areas.  

LEAD 210   The Face of Leadership 

3 credits 

This is a highly interactive course that allows the student to explore the phenomenon of leadership  through film, 
theater, and literature (novel, poetry, epic, history, and biography).  Students will view selected works through the lens of 
current  models  of  organizational  leadership  in  order  to  make  statements,  evaluations,  and  prescriptions  for  their  own 
practical application of leadership. Students may be asked to spend time out of the classroom viewing films or attending 
productions at the Pittsburgh Playhouse. Prerequisite: LEAD 110. 

LEAD 215  Introduction to Interpersonal Communications for Leaders 

3 credits 

This course introduces communication theory, models and application.  Students will explore and identify personal 

style, assess impact and opportunities for communicating across perceived barriers. 

LEAD 305   Organizational Communications for Leaders 

3 credits 

This course offers leadership students the opportunity to examine how leaders in organizations share information with 
members of the internal community and with those outside of the organization.  Communication styles as they relate to 
leadership  roles  within  the  organization  are  discussed  as  well  as  using  communication  to  facilitate  change  with  an 
organization.   Topics  will  include  effective  personal  communication  skills,  audience  analysis,  written  and  electronic 
communication and the development of successful listening skills. 

LEAD 312   Leadership: Confluence of Emotional and Cultural Acumen 

3 credits 

Students will explore the concepts of emotional intelligence and cultural intelligence and consider their level of EI/CI 
as they complete instruments, exercises and gain insight on the various styles of leadership that do not sacrifice the essential 
connections that binds a network or system of people.  This course will facilitate students in understanding, recognizing, 
and honing these skills as well as the application of EI/CI to advancing organizational change. 

LEAD 315   Leading Organizational Change 

3 credits 

Examines the role of the leader as change agent within an organization.  Students will develop mastery in visioning, 
the action-research process, strategic leadership, consensus building, conflict management, overcoming resistance to change, 
performance evaluation, and selected organization development interventions. 

LEAD 317   Understanding Gender and Power:  Gender, Dynamics in Leadership 

3 credits 

This course explores four frames of gender: (1) fix women, (2) celebrate differences, (3) create equal opportunities, and 
(4) revise the work culture.  Leadership majors will explore the nuances of gender in the workplace; looking not only at 
women’s issues – gender will be viewed as a central organizational element and the implications for women, men and how 
the meaning of work is being (re)defined.  Students will examine how power is used and the dis-interpreted in the context 
of women: women as well as men: men, and women: men; on how career-goals and strategies are developed, and how the 
changing roles of women and men are impacting the essence of work, health benefits and more. 

LEAD 405   Leadership Skills for Emerging Leaders 

3 credits 

Provides  students  with  feedback  on  their  own  leadership  style  through  leadership  instruments,  assessments  and 
exercises.   Course  will  include  measurement  and  skill  development  in  personality,  critical  thinking,  decision-making, 
vertical  and  horizontal  communication  strategies,  leader  communication  styles  within  the  context  of  leadership  and 
organizational models, and conflict-management, with attention to critical aspects of growth, change, adult development, 
underlying abilities, and competencies needed to lead effectively in diverse organizations. 

LEAD 410   Ethical Leadership: Challenges Facing 21st Century Leaders 

3 credits 

This course incorporates organizational studies and ethical leadership challenges; includes exploration of leadership 

331 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges within multinational organizations.   Students will examine the codes of ethics found in various organizational 
environments, consider the complexity of multinational organizations and cultural expectations, and the impact of moral 
values on decisions in the organization with emphasis on the ethical dilemmas that leaders and followers face--including 
political, legal, social, and environmental issues. 

LEAD 415   Systems Thinking for Emerging Leaders  

3 credits 

Demonstrates the interdependency of the human-eco system, the necessity for leaders to understand complexities, and 
the need to discern and convey simplicities.  This introduction to systems thinking requires a holistic frame of reference 
that will facilitate leadership students' peel away at the layers of perceptions, anchors, and self-inflicted barriers. 

LEAD 417   Problem-solving and Strategic Planning Techniques for Leaders 

3 credits 

Analyzes the role and responsibilities of leaders in the development of organizational strategic initiatives. Leadership 
students have an opportunity to learn how decision and choice theory are applied to problem identification and problem 
solving, assessing both individual and organizational needs, the alignment of human and capital resources, organizational 
climate, and the identification of key actors and stakeholders within an organization to develop and implement strategic 
initiatives. 

LEAD 445   Career Development and Succession Strategies for Leaders 

3 credits 

In this course, students will analyze the role and responsibility of leaders in creating talent-driven cultures and research 
organizations that employ strategic, systematic strategies designed to develop leadership competencies.  Based on research, 
assessments and feedback, students will present their leader-portfolio and talent-driven model. 

LEAD 194, LEAD 294   Selected Topics   

LEAD 395, 495 Special Topics in Leadership 

1-6 credits 

3 credits 

MATH – MATHEMATICS 

MATH 150  Mathematical Problem Solving                                                               

3 credits 

This course introduces an overview of the mathematics important in posing, communicating, and solving relevant 
quantitative problems. Concepts will be emphasized for their essential role in solving problems encountered in the modern 
professional world and in other academic fields with emphasis on theoretical, logical and technological methods. Specific 
topics form the fields of algebra, number theory, finance, probability, and statistics will be explored. 

MATH 155 General Mathematics 

3 credits 

A  general  mathematics  course  dealing  with  topics  such  as  descriptive  statistics/probability,  geometry, 
estimation/measurement, percents/decimals/rational numbers, as well as other selected topics. Prerequisite: MATH 150. 

MATH 165 Basic Algebra 

3 credits 

Basic algebra including fundamental operations on numbers and polynomials, linear equations and inequalities, the 
Cartesian coordinate system and graphs, and systems of two linear equations. Also factoring techniques, fractions, fractional 
equations and laws of integer exponents. 

MATH 175 Elementary Statistics 

3 credits 

Data  analysis  and  charts,  rules  of  probability,  conditional  probability,  distributions,  random  variables,  sampling, 
confidence interval estimates, hypothesis testing, regression and correlation. Students enrolling in this course should have 
a  background in college preparatory algebra, including high school Algebra I and Algebra II or equivalent. 

MATH 180  College Algebra 

3 credits 

This college level algebra course includes the study of linear, polynomial, rational, radical, quadratic, exponential, and 
logarithmic  functions  and  their  graphs.  Other  topics  include  inequalities,  factoring,  systems  of  equations,  complex 
numbers, and applications. Students enrolling in this course should have a  background in college preparatory algebra, 
including high school Algebra I and Algebra II or equivalent. 

MATH 181 Pre-Calculus 

4 credits 

This course introduces the foundations of analysis necessary to precede the calculus sequence with emphasis 
on  college  algebra  and  trigonometry  including  the  properties  and  graphs  of  linear,  polynomial,  rational,  exponential, 
logarithmic,  trigonometric  functions  and  inverse  trigonometric  functions.    It  will  also  include  solving  equations, 

332 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
trigonometric identities and complex numbers.  Prerequisite:  College Preparatory Algebra, Geometry and Trigonometry. 

MATH 185 Trigonometry  

2 credits 

Includes  trigonometric  functions,  inverse  functions,  trigonometric  identities,  reduction  formulas,  half  and  double 
angle  formulas,  solutions  of  triangles  and  other  applications.  Prerequisite:  MATH  150  or  MATH  165  or  College 
Preparatory Algebra. 

MATH 190 Calculus I 

4 credits 

Functions and limits, the derivative and its significance, differentiation of algebraic functions, applications to rate of 
change and optimization problems; the integral, area, averages and elementary integration techniques. Prerequisites: MATH 
180. 

MATH 205 EPE Calculus 

3 credits 

An Introduction to Engineering Problems using Trigonometry, Differential and Integral Calculus, Vector Analysis, 

Differential Equations and other applicable concepts. Prerequisite: MATH 190. 

MATH 210 Calculus II 

4 credits 

Basic applications of the integral, derivative and integral of exponential, log and trigonometric function, techniques 

of integration, indeterminate forms. Prerequisites: MATH 185, MATH 190. 

MATH 220 Discrete Mathematics 

3 credits 

Logic, sets, mathematical induction, relations, functions, Boolean algebra and rudiments of combinatorics and graph 

theory are covered. Prerequisite: MATH 180. 

MATH 230 Linear Algebra I 

3 credits 

System  of  equations,  Gaussian  procedure,  matrix  algebra,  determinants,  geometry  of  two  and  three  dimensional 
vectors, vector space Rn, subspaces, linear independence and spanning, basis and dimension, eigenvalues and eigenvectors. 
Prerequisite: MATH 190. 

MATH 300 Calculus III 

4 credits 

Sequences and series, polar coordinates, two and three dimensional vectors and curves, functions of several variables, 

partial differentiation, multiple integrals and applications. Prerequisite: MATH 210. 

MATH 310 Differential Equations 

3 credits 

First order differential equations, linear differential equations, series solutions and transform methods. Prerequisite: 

MATH 210. 

MATH 320 Linear Algebra II 

3 credits 

Vector spaces, linear transformations and matrices, bilinear forms, inner product spaces, diagonalization and functions 

of matrices. Prerequisite: MATH 230. 

MATH 330  Mathematical Statistics 

3 credits 

A calculus-based course covering permutations and combinations; random variables; basic, discrete and continuous 
distributions;  expected  values  and  moments;  sum  of  independent  identical  random  variables;  and  selected  topics  on 
statistical estimation and inference.  Prerequisite: MATH 210. 

MATH 340 Modern Applied Algebra 

3 credits 

Introduction  to  semigroups,  groups,  rings,  fields  and  algebras  with  emphasis  on  applications  to  the  theory  of 

computation. Prerequisites: MATH 220, MATH 230. 

MATH 410 Geometry 

3 credits 

Geometry  from  an  advanced  viewpoint  including  a  historical  analysis  of  axiomatic  systems  and  the  relationship 
between geometry and other areas of mathematics.  Topics include a rigorous treatment of classical Euclidean geometry 
incorporating postulate development, problem solving, and construction proofs in two and three dimensions, coordinate 
geometry, and the introduction of non-Euclidean geometries, such as elliptic and hyperbolic.  Prerequisites: MATH 185, 
MATH 220.  

MATH 194, MATH 294             Special Topics                                                    

3 credits 

333 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MATH 296, MATH 396, MATH 496  Independent Study in Mathematics I, II, III  

1-6 credits 

MATH 499 Honors Internship in Mathematics 

1-6 credits 

Available  to  qualified  students  as  a  practicum  within  the  University  or  in  conjunction  with  an  external  agency. 
Requires regular progress reports and a final paper. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: Consent of an instructor to 
act as a sponsor, acceptance by an agency if applicable, approval of the department chair, an overall G.P.A. of 3.30 and a 
departmental G.P.A. of 3.50. 

ME – MECHANICAL ENGINEERING  

ME 101  

Statics 

3 credits 

Introduction  to  mechanical  engineering  through  the  study  of  the  equilibrium  of  particles  and  rigid  bodies  using 
trigonometry  and  vector  analysis.  The  ability  to  compose  complete  free  body  diagrams  is  strongly  emphasized.  Vector 
methods are employed to investigate forces and moments in planar and three-dimensional problems. Pin jointed frames 
are analyzed using the method of joints and the method of sections. Problems involving friction and systems of cables and 
pulleys  are  solved.  Properties  of  area  including  centroid  first  moment  and  second  moment  complete  the  course.  Co-
requisite: MATH 181. 

ME 102   Dynamics 

3 credits 

The kinematics and kinetics associated with the simple or complex motion of particles and rigid bodies based upon 
the principles of the differential and integral calculus. Kinematics involves analysis and quantification of position, velocity 
and  acceleration  of  the  body.  Kinetics  involves  applied  force,  momentum,  potential  and  kinetic  energy,  impulse  and 
moment  of  momentum.  The  course  includes  extensive  coverage  of  ballistics,  relative  motion  and  central  force  field 
problems. Prerequisite: ME 101. Co-requisite: MATH 190. 

ME 212  

Properties of Materials 

3 credits 

A study of atomic and crystalline structure as a means of understanding material behavior. The influence of defects, 
strengthening mechanisms and heat treatment are examined. Mechanical strength properties in tension, compression and 
shear are examined along with the testing means used to determine these properties. Hardness and impact strength and 
related test procedures are investigated. The iron-carbon phase diagram is studied in the context of selecting the appropriate 
heat  treatment  procedure.  In  addition  to  metals  and  alloys  coverage  extends  to  ceramics,  plastics  and  composites. 
Prerequisites: CHEM 101, CHEM 103. 

ME 213  

Strength of Materials 

3 credits 

The analysis of tensile and compressive plane stress, shear stress and bearing stress. The compounding of plain and 
shear stresses in rectilinear coordinates. Rotation of a system of stresses about a single axis leading to equations for the zero 
sums of forces and moments along and about the remaining principle axis (Equilibrium). Production of equations for the 
maximum and minimum principle stresses, maximum shear stress and the principle planes to which these are normal and 
tangential  respectively.  Formation  of  Mohr’s  circle  as  a  graphical  means  of  analysis.  Use  of  the  von  Mises  criterion. 
Examination of shear stress and angle of rotation due to torsion. Examination of tensile, compressive and shear stresses 
due to bending production of shear stress and bending moment diagrams. Formation of the equation of the elastic line 
and its use in determination of displacement and rotation at a point along beams with concentrated and distributed loads 
and with simple and fixed supports. Beams with more than two supports. The stability of columns. Stress and displacement 
of thin wall and thick wall cylinders under internal pressure. The study of shrink fits. Prerequisites: ME 101, MATH 210. 

Strength of Materials Lab                                                                                   

ME 214  
      Introduction to materials testing including tension, compression, ductility, hardness, modulus of elasticity in tension 
and torsion, shear strength, and beam and column testing. A special assignment, including a written report and an oral 
presentation, is required. 

1 credit 

ME 215  

Thermodynamics I 

3 credits 

The kinetic theory of gases is used to generate the ideal gas law and the law for adiabatic expansion and compression. 
For adiabatic processes a set of six equations and their reciprocals are generated for the following: final pressure in terms 
of initial pressure and volume ratio, final volume in terms of initial volume and pressure ratio, final pressure in terms of 
initial  pressure  and  the  temperature  ratio,  final  temperature  in  terms  of  initial  temperature  and  pressure  ratio,  final 
temperature in terms  of initial temperature and volume ratio, final volume in terms of initial volume and temperature 
ratio. Relationships between constant pressure and constant volume specific heats, the characteristic gas constant and the 

334 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exponent  used  in  the adiabatic  relationships  are  explained.  The  use  of  reduced  pressure  and  temperature  (actual  value 
divided by critical value) with the Nelson-Obert generalized compressibility chart provides a factor which when used with 
the ideal gas law becomes the law for real gasses. Gas/vapor mixtures are discussed. Equations for work in constant pressure, 
constant temperature, polytrophic and adiabatic situations are derived and one used along with the concept of internal 
energy change and heat transfer to form the first law of thermodynamics. The concept of enthalpy is introduced. Potential 
and kinetic energy effects along with enthalpy changes lead to the first law for a flowing system. Power cycles investigated 
are the Rankine cycle with superheat and reheat, the Brayton cycle with compressor intercooling reheat and regeneration 
and the Turbo-Diesel cycle. Refrigeration cycles are the vapor compression cycle and the reverse Porceyton cycle. A brief 
discussion on entropy and the second law. Prerequisite: MATH 190. 

ME  194, ME  294               Special Topics                                                             

ME 315  

Thermodynamics II 

3 credits 

3 credits 

The  course  introduces  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  and  the  fluid  property  entropy.  This  permits  extended 
analysis of power cycles such as the Brayton gas turbine cycle and refrigeration cycles such as the vapor compression cycle. 
Thermodynamic relationships are developed and are featured in a variety of solved problems. Pre: ME 215 

ME 320   Kinematics of Machine Elements 

4 credits 

The course opens with a definition of terms such as “link,” “pair,” “revolute” and “mobility.” The Chebychev-Grubler-
Kutzbach equation is justified and is used to find the mobility of an assortment of mechanisms. Equations for the slider 
position, velocity and acceleration of the linline and offset slider crank mechanisms are produced. Results for velocity and 
acceleration generated via the differential calculus and via the application of the finite difference method are compared 
with those obtained from “Working Model” software. Vector analysis and trigonometry are used to produce and equation 
for the rocker tip position of the four bar crank-rocker mechanism. Again, values for velocity and acceleration gained from 
the calculus, the finite difference method and from working model are compared. A graphical method is used to justify 
Grashuf’s theorem. The straight-line mechanisms of Roberts and Chebychev are analyzed. Cycloidal, involute, epicycloidal 
and  hypocycloidal  motions  are  determined  using  vector  analysis.  The  importance  of  involute  motion  is  gear  tooth. 
Interaction is examined. Gear trains using gear and pinion, epicyclic and hypocyclic elements are analyzed to determine 
speed ratio and rotational direction. Graphical and analytical methods are used to design rotary plate cams which impart 
simple  harmonic  or  cycloidal  motion  to  various  follower  types.  Wedge  cams  having  tangential  circular  arc,  tangential 
parabola, cycloidal and simple harmonic profiles are designed. The laboratory component involves teams of two or three 
students producing two detailed professionally presented reports on offset slider-crank and crank-rocker mechanisms which 
are designed to a set of specifications. Prerequisite: ME 102, MATH 210. 

ME 331  

Engineering Design Using Pro/ENGINEER 

3 credits 

The course begins with the PowerPoint presentation “Familiarization with Pro/ENGINEER” followed by a simple 
demonstration by the instructor. Twelve lessons follow a pattern where by instructor demonstration of the Pro/ENGINEER 
feature  which  is  the  topic  for  the  evening,  is  followed  by  individual  student-instructor  interactions  until  students  are 
competent in the use of the feature. The Extrude feature is used to create an electrical bus-bar, a sports emblem, and a bolt-
nut-flat  washer  combination.  The  Sketch  File  feature  is  also  used  with  the  bolt-nut-flat  washer  combination  with  the 
addition of a lock washer. Pattern, Hole, and Mirror features are used to complete the work on the electrical bus-bar. Other 
exercises  include  creation  of  an  exploded  assembly,  creation  of a  drawing  file and  creation  of  datum  points.  These  are 
followed by the use of the Piping and Sweep features and the creation of an assembly using aligned datum’s. The Blend, 
Revolve,  Chamfer  and  Suppcess  features  are  covered.  The  course  ends  with  the  creation  of  a  drawing  having  a  bill  of 
materials. Three sessions are reserved for examination where the students work without assistance on a model prescribed 
by the instructor. Prerequisite: ET 204. 

ME 405   Heat Transfer 

4 credits 

The course begins with a discussion of Fourier’s law governing steady state axial conduction. The law of continuity is 
used  to  expand  this into  the  Poisson  equation  in  rectilinear  coordinates,  which  describes  the  special  temperature  field 
resulting from transient heat flow in three dimensions with internal heat generation. Analytical techniques are limited to 
solutions involving only two of the four independent variables (three spacial plus temporal). A wide variety of problems are 
solved including those for which the cross sectional area of the conductor is variable and for which thermal conductivity 
varies as a function of temperature. The Poisson equation is next derived in popular coordinates. This leads to solutions to 
conduction problems involving cylinders and annuli with or without internal heat generation. The study of the extended 
surface  provides  equations  for  temperature  distribution  along  the  length  of  a  fin  and  for  fin  efficiency.  The  study  of 
convective heat transfer begins with the use of Buckingham Pi theorem to show the importance of Reynolds number and 
the Prandl number. Correlations for convective heat transfer within conduits and external to surfaces are presented and 
discussed. In problem solving, the emphasis is on turbulent flow situations. Our work on convection culminates with the 

335 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design of a shell and tube heat exchange where the concept of log-mean temperature difference is introduced. Our work 
on radiative heat transfer leads to an equation for an effective heat transfer coefficient when surface temperature changes 
as a function of time, as in the case for the cooling of steel or aluminum ingots or strip. A conclusive section involves the 
treatment  of  nucleate  boiling  where  micro-convection  dominates  and  with  film  boiling  which  can  lead  meltdown. 
Prerequisite: MATH 310. 

ME 406   Heat Transfer Lab                                                                                            
   This course provides a means of verifying various elements of heat transfer theory through experiments in conduction, 
convection, and radiation for gasses and/or liquids. Comprehensive reports are required. Prerequisites: ME 215, ME 405 

1 credit 

ME 411  

Fluid Mechanics 

3 credits 

The course begins with a study of fluid statics. This includes buoyancy and the criteria for stability of buoyant objects. 
The relationship for hydrostatic force on a submerged surface along with the determination of center of pressure is used to 
solve problems involving vertical and inclined sluice gates. Hydrostatic forces on curved surfaces are determined. Moving 
into fluid dynamics Bernoulli’s equation for incompressible flow is generated and is applied to the determination of static, 
dynamic  and  stagnation  pressures.  It  is  shown  that the  general  energy  equation  for  steady  flows  reduces  to  Bernoulli’s 
equation if terms representing work input and mechanical losses are eliminated. Analysis of hydroelectric power generation 
is a typical application of the general energy equation. The Buckingham Pi theorem is used to show the importance of 
Reynolds number in the determination of frictional pressure loss for flow within a conduit. The equation for pressure loss 
in  laminar  flow  is  generated.  For  turbulent  flow  the  friction  factor  is  determined  empirically  using  for  example  the 
Colebrook equation. The concept of relative surface roughness is introduced. The Moody chart is presented. Dynamic head 
losses are covered for entries, exits, elbows and transitions. Simple piping networks are analyzed. The characteristics of 
various types of pump are presented. The concept of specific speed is introduced and is used for selecting the best type of 
pump  for  a  particular  application.  For  external  flow  the  relationships  for  drag  and  lift  are  presented.  Appropriate 
application of a fan, a blower or a compressor for a particular air moving situation is the concluding event of the course. 
Prerequisites: ME 102, MATH 190. 

Fluid Mechanics Lab                                                                                      

ME 412  
      Introduces  students  to  the  special  tools  used  by  the  fluid  power  industries  and  the  manual  skills  required  in 
implementing fluid mechanics applications. Special techniques in flow measurement and implementation. ME 411. 

1 credit 

ME 416   Dynamic Systems and Vibrations 

3 credits 

This course integrates differential equations with dynamics to provide a means of modeling, analyzing, and controlling 
mechanical and electrical systems. The course begins with a review of the Laplace transform and the frequency domain. 
Modeling of dynamic systems starts by developing system equations using free body diagrams, Newton's second law, Ohm's 
law, and Kirchoff's laws. These system equations are the converted to transfer functions (using the Laplace transform) or to 
a state space representation. Once the system is modeled, the response to various inputs can be determined in the time 
domain and the frequency domain. These system responses can also be controlled using various feedback control methods, 
such  as  PID  and  LQR  methods.  Finally,  the  course  ends  with  discussions  of  vibration  transmission  and  isolation. 
Prerequisites: MATH 230, MATH 310. 

ME 421   Machine Design, Theory and Project 

4 credits 

The  course  begins  with  a  review of  basic  strengths  of  materials  including  plane  stress,  shear  stress,  stresses  due  to 
bending and torsion and the stability of columns. Further work includes the generation of equations for principle stress 
and maximum shear stresses resulting from the compounding of bending and torsional stresses. The von Mises criterion is 
presented.  Rayleigh’s  equation  for  the  critical  speed  of  shafts  carrying  gears  is  developed  and  the  method  is applied  to 
systems having three concentrated loads with two bearings. Bearings might be of the sleeve or spherical roller type. A shaft 
design project requires that students draw from their knowledge of dynamics and strength of materials to determine the 
required diameter of a shaft which is subject to bending and torsion and must transmit a specified power using a given 
safety  factor.  The  critical  speed  of  the  system  is  determined.  Stresses  are  determined  for  thin  walled  and  thick  walled 
cylinders which are subject to internal pressure. This work is extended to deal with concentric cylinders and shrink-fits. 
Keys and keyways are designed using maximum shear stress and maximum bearing stress criteria. Belt drive systems are 
designed with consideration of lifting systems includes those using acme power screws and those using ball screws. Drum 
brakes, disc brakes and clutches are designed. The course closes with work on proper choice of electric motors for a given 
application. Prerequisites: MATH 210, ME 102, ME 213, ME 320. 

ME 424  

Finite Element Analysis 

3 credits 

The course begins with the generation of the stiffness matrix for systems of springs and cables in series or parallel 
connected form. Rotation of axes permits rigid element to be pin  jointed to form a truss. The stiffness matrix of each 

336 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
member is written in terms of the global “x” and “y” axes of the truss to form the global truss stiffness matrix. Loads and 
supports are applied to nodes (the pin joints) to form a force vector. A vector representing the “x” and “y” displacement at 
the nodes is written. By Hook’s law the scalar multiplication of the stiffness matrix into the displacement vector is seen to 
equal the force vector. After a review of bending theory the FEA method is applied to simply supported and built-in beams 
to form the beam stiffness matrix. Using the work equivalence concept, synthetic loads and moments are applied at the 
nodes to represent real distributed loads that exist between the nodes. Symmetry is used where applicable. The work on 
frames  is  combined  with  the  work  on  beams  to  form  the  stiffness  matrix  for  each  element  of  a  rigidly  jointed  planar 
structure. After globalization and the formation of a vector of applied forces and moments, the system is solved to yield a 
vector of “x” and “y” displacements and rotations at every node. Following a review of torsional theory the FEA method is 
applied to grid structures for which the loading gives rise to twisting and bending. Again a stiffness matrix for a grid element 
is  generated.  Following  globalization  vectors  are  formed  for  forces  and  moments  and  for  displacements  and  rotations. 
Solution  yields  displacements  and  rotation  at  the  nodes.  After  a  review  of  Fourier’s  and  Poisson’s  equations  for  heat 
conduction the calculus of variations is used to form conductance matrices and heat flux vectors for a variety of multi 
element heated or cooled objects for which nodal temperatures must be determined. Internal heat generation is accounted 
for. Boundary conditions include adiabatic, applied heat flux and convective heating or cooling. Prerequisite: MATH 230, 
MATH 310, ME 213, ME 405. 

ME 425  

FEA and ANSYS 

2 credits 

The course begins with an overview of the finite element method followed by an exploration of the ANSYS interface 
and ANSYS help facilities. Key points in a plane are established and are connected to form a truss. Constraints and loads 
are applied. The displacement of key points (nodes) under the loaded condition are determined. Meshing methods are 
introduced and are applied to plates. Plane stress and plane strain are determined for plates that are subject to a variety of 
loading conditions. Axisymmetric  problems are introduced. These include analysis of stress in the shell of a cylindrical 
vessel which is subject to internal or external pressure loading. Key points in three dimensions are  established and are 
connected to form a three dimensional structure. Plates are applied to the structure and are meshed. Constraints and loads 
are applied. The stress and strain pattern over the structure is produced. Beams that have simple and built-in supports are 
subjected to concentrated and distributed loads. Displacement and rotation at selected nodes are established. Application 
of ANSYS to problems in heat transfer includes axisymetrical and asymmetrical objects that are subject to a variety of surface 
heat flux and convective cooling conditions. Radiative boundary conditions are also applied. The object might also have 
internal heat generation. Steady state and transient situations are examined. Co-requisite: ME 424. 

MET – MECHANICAL ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY 

MET 101    Statics  

3 credits 

The study of the equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies using mathematical and/or graphical analysis.  Free-body 
diagrams are strongly emphasized.  Vector methods are employed to investigate forces and moments in planar and three-
dimensional problems.  Pin jointed trusses and frames are analyzed using the method of joints and the method of sections.  
Problems  involving  friction  and properties  of  area  including  first moment,  centroid  and  second  moment  complete  the 
course.   Dual listed as CET 101. Prerequisite or co-requisite: MATH 185. 

MET 102    Dynamics 

3 credits 

The kinematics and kinetics associated with the simple or complex motion of particles and rigid bodies based upon 
the principles of the differential and integral calculus are investigated. Kinematics involves analysis and quantification of 
position, velocity and acceleration of the body.  Kinetics involves applied force, momentum, potential and kinetic energy, 
impulse  and  moment  of  momentum.    There  is  extensive  coverage  of  ballistics,  relative  motion  and  central  force  field 
problems. Prerequisite: CET/MET 101. 

MET 212    Properties of Materials 

3 credits 

A study of atomic and crystalline structure as a means of understanding material behavior.  The influence of defects, 
strengthening mechanisms and heat treatments are examined.  Mechanical strength properties in tension/compression, 
shear,  hardness  and  impact  and  related  test  procedures  are  investigated.    The  Iron-Carbon  phase  diagram  is  studied.  
Coverage also addresses ceramics, plastics and composites.  Dual listed as CET 212. Prerequisite:  CHEM 101. 

MET 213    Strength of Materials 

3 credits 

The study of stress and strain, deformation, riveted and welded joints, thin-wall pressure vessels, torsion, shear and 
stresses in beams, design of beams, deflection of beams, Mohr’s circle and columns. Reference to applications for civil and 
mechanical  engineering  technology.  Dual  listed  as  CET  213.  Prerequisites:  MET  101,  MET  212;  Prerequisite  or  co-

337 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requisite: MATH 190. 

MET 214    Strength of Materials Laboratory  

1 credit 

Introduction to materials testing including tension, compression, ductility, hardness, modulus of elasticity in tension 
and modulus of rigidity in torsion, shear strength, and beam and column testing. A special assignment, including a written 
report and oral presentation, is required. Dual listed as CET 214. Prerequisite or co-requisite: MET 213. 

MET 215   Thermodynamics 

3 credits 

Topics include the properties of ideal and imperfect gases and two-phase mixtures. All thermodynamics properties 
such as internal energy, entropy and enthalpy are defined and applied.  The concepts of work and heat transfer are examined 
through a wide variety of problems.  The first and second laws are covered from both system and control volume viewpoints, 
for static fluids and for fluids in motion.  Refrigeration cycles, steam cycles and gas turbine cycles are covered in detail 
utilizing steam tables, gas tables, T-S and P-H diagrams. Prerequisite: MATH 190. 

MET 320   Kinematics of Machine Elements 

4 credits 

Kinematic analysis of displacement, velocity and acceleration is applied to a variety of machine elements, including 
three-bar and four-bar linkages, cams and gears. Analytical techniques that make extensive use of the differential calculus, 
are stressed. These are coupled with graphical methods for the design of plate cams.  Extensive use is made of commercial 
software  packages  including  “Working  Model®”  and  “ALGOR®  Event  Simulator  FEA®”,  in  a  comprehensive  lab 
component. Prerequisites: CMPS 204; MATH 190; MET 102. 

MET 331  Engineering Design Using Pro/ENGINEER 

3 credits 

Engineering  Design  Using  Pro/ENGINEER  gives  the  student  the  ability  to  use  the  most  advanced  and  highly 
regarded design software.  Aspects of the course include sketching, 3D part modeling, 3D assemblies, exploded assemblies 
and the creation of manufacturing drawings from the parametric model.  Students produce PowerPoint presentations to 
display completed work. Prerequisite: CMPS 204. 

MET 405   Heat Transfer 

4 credits 

A study of the fundamental laws of conduction, convection, boiling, condensation and radiation. Analytical methods 
are applied to one and two dimensional conduction problems with convective boundary conditions. The foundations of 
empirical equations for a variety of convection situations are examined using similitude methods to form dimensionless 
groups such as Nusselt Number.  Theory is rigorously reinforced through the solution of many problems.  Fundamental 
laws are applied to the design of variety of heat exchanger types.  A heat exchanger design project is included.  Prerequisites: 
ET 204, MATH 210, MET 215. Prerequisite or co-requisite: MATH 310. 

MET 411    Fluid Mechanics 

3 credits 

The  study  of  the  physical  behavior  of  incompressible  and  compressible  fluids  and  fluid  systems.    Hydrostatic  and 
hydrodynamic systems are considered.  Fluid transmission and control applications include the design of weirs, orifices and 
valves. The determination of pressure losses in open and closed systems is covered. Other topics include the storage of 
energy by pressurized fluids in closed systems. Problems of interest in both Civil and Mechanical Engineering Technology 
are included. Dual listed as CET 411. Prerequisites: MET 102; CMPS 204; MATH 210. 

MET 412    Fluid Mechanics Laboratory 

1 credit 

Introduces students to the special tools used by fluid power industries and the manual skills required in implementing 
fluid  mechanics  applications.  Special  techniques  in  flow  measurement  and  implementation.  Dual  listed  as  CET  412. 
Prerequisite or co-requisite: MET 411.  

MET 416    Mechanical Vibrations 

3 credits 

The  study  of  single  and  multiple  degree  of  freedom  vibration  systems.  Undamped  unforced,  damped  unforced, 
undamped forced and systems with both damping and forcing are covered.  Spring elements of the helical, torsion bar and 
leaf spring types are included.  Dampers are of the viscous or frictional type.  Forcing functions are harmonic or impulsive.  
The emphasis is on producing the differential equation(s) from the free body diagram and inertial considerations, solution 
of the equation(s) and application of the solutions to practical problems.  Prerequisites: MET 102; CMPS 204; MATH 210. 
Prerequisite or co-requisite:  MATH 230 or MATH 310. 

MET 421 

 Machine Design: Theory and Project 

4 credits 

Analysis and design of a wide variety of machine components. Machine frames are analyzed from compound stress, 
fatigue  stress  and  deflection  viewpoints.  Among  machine  elements  that  are  covered  are  keys,  shrink  fits,  shafts,  power 
screws, disc and drum brakes, gears, couplings, belt drives and cable systems. A design project is included. Prerequisites: 

338 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MATH 210; MET 102, MET 213; CMPS 204. 

MET 424  Finite Element Analysis (FEA) 

3 credits 

Teaches the use of the finite element method wherein the algorithms for elements subjected to axial forces and bending 
are developed. Also developed are the algorithms for pin-jointed frames, stiff jointed frames and grid structures. Algorithms 
for conduction heat transfer with convective boundary conditions and internal heat generation are developed. Problems 
are solved in all areas of application. Prerequisite: MATH 210. Prerequisites or co-requisites: MET 405, MET 411. 

MET 425  FEA with ANSYS®     

2 credits 

This course complements MET 424 (Finite Element Analysis (FEA)). In MET 424 the basic finite element algorithms 
for elastic members, pin-jointed and rigid-jointed frames, bending of beams, torsional members and grid structures were 
developed.  Also  developed  were  the  finite  element  algorithms  or  conduction  heat  transfer  with  convective  boundary 
conditions. Hand and spreadsheet calculations for simple systems were performed. In MET 425 the student will learn how 
to  use  the  commercial  finite  element  software  ANSYS®  to  perform  analysis  of  much  larger  systems.  Additionally  the 
methodology for performing stress calculations for plates and shells is presented and applied. Prerequisite or co-requisite: 
MET 424. 

MET 194,MET  294            Special Topics                                                             

MET 295, MET 395, MET 495  Special Topics in Mechanical  
Engineering Technology I, II, III 

MET 296, MET 396, MET 496  Independent Study in  Mechanical 
Engineering Technology I, II, III 

MET 499   Honors Internship in Mechanical Engineering Technology  

 3 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

Available  to  qualified  students  as  a  practicum  within  the  University  or  in  conjunction  with  an  external  agency. 
Requires regular progress reports and a final paper. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: Consent of an instructor to 
act as a sponsor, acceptance by an agency if applicable, approval of the department chair, an overall G.P.A. of 3.30 and a 
departmental G.P.A. of 3.50. 

MKTS – MARKETING and SALES 

MKTS 205  Principles of Marketing and Sales                                                                       
        This foundational marketing and sales course introduces students to the principles and practices of marketing and 
sales,  including  and  its  foundations  in  influence  and  persuasion,  including  the  marketing  mix,  environment,  research, 
strategy, planning, and digital applications. Students will explore careers and gain an understanding of the dynamic role of 
marketing and sales in organizations and in society. 

3 credits 

MKTS 206  Professional Selling                                                                                            
      This foundational selling course takes a holistic approach to selling and the sales process, emphasizing sales strategies 
and techniques from a need-satisfaction perspective. Topics will include sales careers, the role of sales in an organization, 
communication  and  influence  skills,  ethics  and  social  responsibility,  and  the  selling  process.  Students  will  have  an 
opportunity to apply the selling process, including pre-call research, prospecting, uncovering needs and buying motives, 
presenting sales messages, negotiating, and gaining commitment through exercises and role-plays. Prerequisite: MKTS 205 
or SAEM 202.  

3 credits 

learn  the  basic 

MKTS 210  Digital Marketing                                                                                                
       The internet and related technology skills are required by most business today – particularly in the realm of marketing.  
including  advertising,  search  engine 
the  online  marketing  ecosystem 
You’ll 
optimization/management,  analytics,  content  development/deployment  and  social  media.    This  is  a  hybrid  course, 
combining online learning with in-person implementation of learning with real clients during our class time.  Dual Listed 
with SAEM 210. Prerequisites: SAEM 202 or BMGT 205. 

language  of 

3 credits 

MKTS 211  Digital Customer Experience 
        This course focuses on the current and future state of digital across industries. You'll learn the basic language of the 
digital world, and learn and explore the key drivers of Digital Customer Experience( CS) across industries to create value 

                                                                            3 credits 

339 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for an organization. Topics will include career opportunities, customer experience, conversion and testing, agile/product 
methodology, and the role of data, AI/ML. Prerequisite: MKTS 205 or SAEM 202 

MKTS 280  Marketing Career Prep                                                                                    
       This class will prepare students for entry into the professional world of marketing and sales by developing foundational 
skills in interviewing and marketing themselves utilizing resumes, cover letters, social media, and e-portfolios. Prerequisites: 
Marketing & Sales Major, MKTS 205.  

1 credit 

MKTS 303  Integrated Marketing Promotion 
        This course explores for-profit and not-for-profit business organizations including the Sports, Arts, and Entertainment 
sectors both as vehicles for product services of advertising and public relations as well as entities that are in constant need 
of  advertising  and  public  relations.  Course  covers  strategies/tactics  for  promoting  via  advertising,  public  relations,  and 
social  media.  Course  also  explores  sponsorship,  public  relations  plans,  crisis  public  relations  and  social  media.  Prereq: 
MKTS 205 or SAEM 202. 

                                           3 credits 

MKTS 304  International Marketing                                                                     
       An introduction to the tools and techniques for successful competition in the international marketplace. Clarification 
of  such  issues  as  marketing  objectives;  environmental  and  competitors’  analyses;  and  product,  pricing  and  promotion 
strategies applicable to a variety of national settings. Prerequisite: BMGT 205, BMGT 303. 

3 credits 

MKTS 305  Buyer Behavior                                                                                              
        Understanding decision processes and the buying behavior of consumers and organizations guides development of 
marketing and sales initiatives. In this course, concepts, theories, and frameworks will be introduced to understand buyer 
behavior and its implications for marketing and sales decision-making. Prerequisite: MKTS 205 

3 credits 

MKTS 306  Advanced Selling                                                                                           
        Building  on  the  foundational  class,  this  course  will  focus  on  advanced  instruction  in  selling  techniques  with  an 
emphasis on needs analysis, buying motives, influence, and creative problem-solving, preparing students for success in entry-
level professional selling positions. It will provide an opportunity for students to apply selling skills through extensive role-
playing and practical application. Prerequisites: MKTS 205, MKTS 206. 

3 credits 

MKTS 310  Personal Branding & Business Development                                               
       Marketing and selling oneself is important in many aspects of personal and professional development, particularly in 
the fields of marketing and sales. In this course, students will build their own professional personal brand and conduct 
business with appropriate and expected etiquette. Marketing and sales concepts and theories, including the marketing mix 
and sales process, will be used for personal brand development and business development. Prerequisites: MKTS Major, 
MKTS 205, MKTS 206. 

3 credits 

MKTS 311  Marketing Research and Analytics                                                              
        This course emphasizes the role of systematic information gathering and analysis for marketing decision-making with 
an emphasis on the analysis and interpretation of primary and secondary data. Principles of marketing analytics will be 
covered, with a focus on translating data into meaningful business insights and strategy. Data privacy and ethics will also 
be considered. Case studies and/or client-based projects will be utilized. Prerequisites: MKTS 205 

3 credits 

MKTS 320  Creativity and Product Innovation                                                               
         Innovation is essential to the long-term success- and even survival- of most organizations. Effective, ethical marketing 
offerings solve problems and satisfy needs, and ongoing product development efforts require creativity and innovation. 
This course introduces and explores innovation as a management process, investigating the role of creativity in innovation, 
value creation through innovation and product development, and the product development process. Prerequisite: MKTS 
205 

3 credits 

MKTS 330  Playhouse Practicum                                                               
         Experiential Learning enables students to demonstrate their ability to apply knowledge and theory learned in the 
classroom  while  providing  skill  development  through  professional-level  application.  In  this  course,  students  will  apply 
marketing/sales skills through experiential learning in conjunction with the Pittsburgh Playhouse. This is a hybrid course 
that will meet in person and include online and virtual components and requires custom scheduling with the Playhouse. 
Prerequisites: MKTS 205, MKTS 206, or instructor/director permissions. 

3 credits 

340 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MKTS 335  Sponsorship in Marketing & Sales                                                               
         In  this  course,  students  will  learn  about  the  business  of  corporate  sponsorships,  their  value  to  sports,  arts,  and 
entertainment organizations, and their ability to create brand affinity for the sponsoring organization. Prerequisite: MKTS 
205. 

3 credits 

MKTS 341  Research Methods in a Business Environment  
      This course explores various qualitative and quantitative research methods, experimental controls, data analysis, and 
scientific communication used in a business environment.  Upon completion of the course, students will know how to 
formulate  research  questions,  select  the  appropriate  research  methodology,  collect  and  analyze  data,  and  communicate 
findings and recommendations. The SHRM competencies will be addressed in this course including but not limited to 
Critical Evaluation. Dual listed with BMGT 342 and HRM 342. Pre-requisite: MATH 175, BMGT 221. 

3 credits 

MKTS 345  Influencer Marketing 

3 credits 

Incorporating influencers into a marketing campaign involves strategy, planning, and execution. This course delves 
into the dynamic world of influencer marketing from multiple perspectives: influencers, brands, and agencies, considering 
how it can be employed to influence buyer behavior, build brand awareness, and drive sales, aligning with business goals. 
Students will explore the influencer landscape, including the roles and challenges faced by unrepresented and represented 
talent, brands running influencer campaigns, and agencies managing talent and campaigns. Prerequisite: MKTS 205. 

MKTS 350  Marketing and Sales Experiential Learning  
        Experiential learning enables you to demonstrate your ability to apply knowledge and theory learned in the classroom 
while providing skill development through professional-level application. You will build valuable experience with a project 
or  initiative  through  an  organization,  community,  or  competition.  This  course  requires  you  to  complete  a  project  or 
initiative that exemplifies the application of marketing/sales best practices along with weekly updates to the instructor and 
a final report. This is a Pass/Fail course. Prerequisites MKTS 205 and MKTS 206. Students must have completed at least 
60 hours. Transfer students must also have completed at least one semester at Point Park University. The experience must 
be approved by the Director of the Marketing and Sales Program. 

3 credits 

MKTS 355  Internship I                                                                                               
         Internships  provide  students  with  hands-on  experience  in  marketing/sales.  Students  gain  practical  experience, 
enhance  skills  learned  in  the  classroom,  and  acquire  professional  contacts.  Qualifying  internships  include  on-site 
professional marketing and/or sales experiences in commercial, institutional, governmental, or not-for-profit organizations. 
Specific  requirements  and  methods  of  evaluation  will be  determined  by  the  supervising  faculty  and  the  internship  site 
supervisor at the cooperating site. Reporting requirements may include daily journal entries or weekly/biweekly updates, 
and a portfolio or final report, along with internship site supervisor evaluations. A three credit internship is equivalent to 
a minimum 150 hours of work over the course of a semester. To receive credit, students must register for an internship 
course period to the start date of their internship. Prerequisites: MKTS 205, 206                                             

3 credits 

MKTS 356  Internship II                                                                                           
       Internships  provide  students  with  hands-on  experience  in  marketing/sales.  Students  gain  practical  experience, 
enhance  skills  learned  in  the  classroom,  and  acquire  professional  contacts.  Qualifying  internships  include  on-site 
professional marketing and/or sales experiences in commercial, institutional, governmental, or not-for-profit organizations. 
Specific  requirements  and  methods  of  evaluation  will be  determined  by  the  supervising  faculty  and  the  internship  site 
supervisor at the cooperating site. Reporting requirements may include daily journal entries or weekly/biweekly updates, 
and a portfolio or final report, along with internship site supervisor evaluations. A three credit internship is equivalent to 
a minimum 150 hours of work over the course of a semester. To receive credit, students must register for an internship 
course period to the start date of their internship. Prerequisites: MKTS 205, 206, 355  

3 credits 

MKTS 395 Special Topics in Marketing and Sales                                                   

3 credits 

MKTS 406  Sales Management                                                                                  
       Effective  sales  management  is  integral  to  an  organization's  success.  This  course  provides  a  framework  for  the 
integration of sales within the organization's overall marketing effort. Emphasis will be placed on designing, organizing, 
developing,  and  directing  a  sales force  ethically and  responsibly,  with  a  focus on  problem-solving  and  critical thinking. 
Prerequisites: MKTS 205, MKTS206. 

3 credits 

MKTS 410  Technology/Innovation in Mktg. & Sales                                                 
       In marketing and sales, both strategy and implementation are significantly impacted by technology and digital tools, 
and  this  course  will  explore  new  and  existing  technologies  to  better  prepare  students  to  enter  these  dynamic  fields. 
Prerequisites: KTS 205, MKTS 206. 

3 credits 

341 

 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
MKTS 415  Advanced Digitial Marketing                                            
        This  advanced  digital  marketing  course  hones  high-impact  skills  that  directly  translate  to  professional  outcomes, 
equipping participants to execute complex strategies with confidence. Ideal for those with foundational knowledge, it covers 
advanced techniques in content strategy, data analysis, SEO, and multi-channel marketing that are essential for driving 
measurable results. Through hands-on experience with industry tools and real-world scenarios, students master data-driven 
methods  to  enhance  audience  engagement  and  maximize  campaign  effectiveness.  Interactive  projects  simulate  real 
professional challenges, allowing students to build portfolio-ready deliverables that showcase their expertise. Collaboration 
and feedback sessions foster a learning community, providing insights and networking opportunities with peers. By course 
end, participants will be empowered to navigate and excel in the demands of high-level digital marketing roles. Prerequisites: 
MKTS 205, MKTS 210. 

3 credits 

MKTS 420  Strategic Marketing and Sales Management                                            
      Effective marketing and sales management, along with collaboration and alignment of marketing and sales strategy and 
planning, is integral to an organization's success. This course focuses on strategically managing and leading marketing and 
sales  efforts  from  the  perspective  of  a  decision-maker,  synthesizing  marketing  and  sales  with  the  organization's  overall 
strategy. Emphasis will be placed on ethics and social responsibly, with a focus on problem-solving and critical thinking. 
Prerequisites: MKTS 205, MKTS 206, MKTS 210, MKTS 341. 

3 credits 

MLNG – MODERN LANGUAGES 

MLNG 205 Languages of the World 

3 credits 

This course introduces students to theories of human language.  Students will look at how and when speech and 
writing systems developed, including the history and evolution of various protolanguages.  Students will study geographic, 
political, and sociocultural factors involved in language development and use.  The course includes language recognition 
and analysis activities and directed application of theory. Dual listed with GCS 205. 

MLNG 221 Spanish Literature in Translation 

The same course format as MLNG 220 but with different texts.  

MLNG 260  Japanese Culture 

3 credits 

3 credits 

A study of the culture of Japan with special emphasis on the historical development and underlying dynamics of the 
Japanese  world  view.  Education, child-rearing,  business  practices,  morality,  relationships,  language,  and  the  arts  will  be 
explained. Dual listed as SOC 260. 

MLNG 302 Introduction to Linguistics 

3 credits 

Provides students with an introduction to broad areas of linguistic theory and inquiry, including an introduction to 
the  study  of  morphology,  semantics,  syntax,  phonetics,  phonology,  and  historical  linguistics.    It  also  includes  an 
introduction to areas included within the disciplines of psycholinguistics and sociolinguistics.  Dual-listed as ENGL 302. 

MLNG 375/GCS 375 Popular Culture 
     Examines  the  American  experience  in  terms  of  its  multiple  cultural  expressions.  By  adopting  the  methods  of  social 
scientists, the students will develop an analytical perspective and gain awareness of American culture and of cross-cultural 
communication.  Issues  such  as  stereotyping  and  representation  of  "the  other"  will  be  explored.  The  theoretical 
considerations, along with a close focus on various cultural texts ( literary, print, and visual media)-through a practice of 
"reading  also  between  the  lines'-will  provide  the  students  with  greater  understanding  of  culture  in  general  and  of  the 
processes involved in cultural production. 

3 credits 

MLNG 194, MLNG 294       Special Topics                                                              

MLNG 295, MLNG 395, MLNG 495 
Special Topics in Modern Languages I, II, III  

MLNG 296, MLNG 396, MLNG 496   
Independent Study in Modern Languages I, II, III 

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

342 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MOD – MODERN 

MOD 101    Supplemental Modern I 

1-2 credits 

This course provides fundamental instruction in Modern Dance Technique. Students will learn how to put into action 
a  wide  range  of  movement  concepts  and  skills.    Instruction  provides  methods  for  improving  movement  organization, 
efficient  and  effective  strength  and  stamina  building,  with  a  strong  emphasis  on  developing  performance  skills. 
Prerequisites: B.A. Dance Major, Not Modern Concentration. 

MOD 102    Supplemental Modern II 

1-2 credits 

This course is a continuation of MOD 101 and provides level II, instruction in modern dance. Principles learned in 
term I will be reinforced and students will learn how to adapt them to a wider range of movement. Prerequisites: MOD 
101. 

MOD 111    Modern I 

3 credits 

An elementary, level 1 course. Students will employ modern/contemporary movement concepts such as stabilization, 
breath  support  and  functional  alignment  to  develop  their  movement  skills.  They  will  improve  methods  for  movement 
organization, skill development and presentation. The course provides an overview of the history of early modern dance. 
Prerequisite: Freshmen dance major; audition.   

MOD 121    Modern II 

3 credits 

An elementary, level 2 course. Students will learn how to integrate basic movement skills into combination work. They 
will develop coordination, musicality, and awareness of their body in space. Students will learn about prominent American 
modern dance figures.  Prerequisite: MOD 111.   

MOD 201   Supplemental Modern I 

1-2 credits 

This course is the first in a sequence of six courses that provide an overview of select modern/contemporary dance 
styles. Styles will vary per term and will progressively challenge technical and artistic development. Using skills introduced 
in MOD 111/121 such as movement stabilization, and integrating basic movement concepts, students will learn how to 
adopt methods to a variety of different movement vocabularies. Course material will develop high-elementary Level I skills. 
Prerequisite: MOD 121 

MOD 202   Supplemental Modern II 

1-2 credits 

This course  is the second in a sequence of six courses that provide an overview of select modern/contemporary dance 
styles. Styles will vary per term and will progressively challenge technical and artistic development. Principles of musicality 
and  basic  methods  to  articulate  movement  clearly  through  space  will  be  taught.  Course  material  will  develop  high 
elementary level II skills.  Prerequisite: MOD 201 

MOD 211    Modern III 

3 credits 

An intermediate level 1 course. Students will learn skills that develop balance, efficient weight-shifts, and suspension. 

Movement transitions and musicality are stressed. Prerequisite: MOD 121 

MOD 221    Modern IV 

3 credits 

An intermediate level 2 course. Students will learn the elements of fall and recovery, spatial awareness, use of dynamics 

in combination work, and how to safely increase range of motion. Prerequisite: MOD 211 

MOD 291    Modern Dance Repertory I 

1 credit 

Students broaden their exposure to the modern/contemporary concert dance canon through participation in restaging 
of existing works. This course involves researching, training, and rehearsing with a focus on advanced performance skills 
culminating in a final showcase. Prerequisites: MOD 121. 

MOD 301   Supplemental Modern III 

1-2 credits 

This course is the third in a sequence of six courses that provide an overview of select modern/contemporary dance 
styles.  Styles  will  vary  per  term  and  will  progressively  challenge  technical  and  artistic  development.  Students  examine 
different  ways  of  perceiving  and  shifting  weight  effectively,  and  practice  integrating  improvisational  skills  in  classwork. 
Course material will develop low intermediate level I skills.  Prerequisite: MOD 202. 

MOD 302   Supplemental Modern IV 

1-2 credits 

This course is the fourth in a sequence of six courses that provide an overview of select modern/contemporary dance 
styles. Styles will vary per term and will progressively challenge technical and artistic development. Spatial awareness and 

343 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
movement dynamics in relation to performance skills are further developed. Course material will develop low-intermediate 
level II skills.  Prerequisite: MOD 301.   

MOD 311    Modern V 

3 credits 

High- intermediate level I course. Students will learn skills that develop a dynamic range of physicality as related to 
more complex movement phrasing. Quick response to aural and rhythmic variations are refined. Experimentation with 
performance skills is addressed.  Prerequisite: MOD 221 

MOD 321    Modern VI 
       A high intermediate level II course. Students will learn how to take responsibility for their movement praxis through 
classroom discussion and written assignments. Students will learn how to integrate various skills and styles, as well as use 
improvisational and performative elements in classwork.   Prerequisite: MOD 221. 

3 credits 

MOD 401   Supplemental Modern V 

1-2 credits 

  This course is the fifth in a sequence of six courses that provide an overview of select modern/contemporary dance 
styles. Styles will vary per term and will progressively challenge technical and artistic development. Students will be given 
the  opportunity  to  experiment  creatively  with  class  material.  Technical  competency  is  developed.  Course  material  will 
develop intermediate, level I skills.  Prerequisite: MOD 302.   

MOD 402   Supplemental Modern VI 

1-2 credits 

This course is the sixth and last in a sequence of six courses that provide an overview of select modern/contemporary 
dance styles. Styles will vary per term and will progressively challenge technical and artistic development. Performance skills 
are emphasized. Course material will develop intermediate level skills. Prerequisite: MOD 401.   

MOD 411    Modern VII 

3 credits 

An advanced Level 1 course. Students create innovative approaches to technical terminology in order to execute a 

wide range of diverse movement genres. Prerequisite: MOD 321 

MOD 421    Modern VIII 
     An advanced, level 2 course. Class material provides students with a strong aesthetic focus, and fine tunes personal 
artistry  with  regard  to  technical  and  performance  execution  at  the  pre  professional  level.  Students  will  be  given  the 
opportunity to create a video showcasing their work in class. Prerequisite: MOD 411 

3 credits 

MULT – MULTIMEDIA 

MULT 220 Writing for Multimedia and the Web  

3 credits 

This  course  will  provide  students  with  the  skills  necessary  to  write  multimedia  content  for  many  different  media 
platforms, including advertising, public relations, journalism, photography, and video. This class will cover Web writing 
skills, including writing for search engine optimization (SEO), social media and blogging. Upon completion of this course, 
students will have a variety of written assignments spanning multiple disciplines to add to their portfolios. Students must 
pass with a C- or better to progress in the major if this is a required major course. Prerequisite: COMM 115 

MULT 280  Introduction to Multimedia 

3 credits 

This  course  will  provide  an  introduction  to  multimedia  production,  writing  and  theory.    Students  will  learn  the 
industry from a historical perspective, as well as learn the basics of blogging and promoting content, video and audio for 
the  Web,  slide  shows,  podcasting,  RSS  feeds,  creating  interactive  quizzes  and  timelines,  mobile  publishing,  and  other 
relevant  topics.  Upon  completion  of  this  course  students  will  have  a  comprehensive  technical  knowledge  of  the  many 
opportunities for multimedia production.  

MULT 330 Multimedia Design 
        This  course  serves  as  an  intermediate  study  of  visual  communication  design.  Students  will  learn  to  apply  theory, 
concepts, and technical skills to visual and interactive design in order to create products used by advertising, public relations 
and  journalism  professionals.  Projects  will  span  print  and  digital  design,  and  may  include  page  layouts,  newsletters, 
brochures, infographics, social media design, photo essays and more. Prerequisite: COMM 120. 

3 credits 

MULT 365 Web Publishing I  

3 credits 

This course will provide technical background for those students in the Digital Media field. Students will incorporate 
Web design theory and technical skills to create a series of Web products, including graphics, animations, and Web pages. 

344 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Students will learn the current practices of Web publishing, which may include HTML, Flash, PhP coding, and the use of 
Content Management Systems. Upon completion of this class, students will have a variety of Web design pieces to add to 
their portfolios. Prerequisite: GRID 103 or COMM 120 

MULT 420  Web Publishing II 

3 credits 

This course will build upon the skills and theory learned in Web Publishing I. Students will incorporate Web design 
theory and technical skills to create a series of advances Web products, which may include Flash, XML, PhP and mobile 
content  coding.  Upon  completion  of  this  class,  students  will  have  a  variety  of  published  Web  pieces  to  add  to  their 
portfolios. Prerequisites: MULT 365. 

MULT 455  Multimedia Capstone  

3 credits 

This course will serve as a capstone to those in the Multimedia major. The course will be conducted in a workshop 
format, with students producing an interactive multimedia project as a final portfolio piece. Components of the project 
may  include  text,  Web  design,  video,  audio,  graphic  design  and  interactive  media  design.  Prerequisite:  BPMM  215  or 
COMM 215, MULT 220, MULT 280, GRID 307 or MULT 330, MULT 365, or permission. 

 MULT 470  Documentary Photography   

3 credits 

Students will work on photo documentary projects based on the established methodology to reduce the fast paced 
world to a set of still images that convey life and world experiences by creating a distinctive and compelling sense of reason, 
place  and  time.    Students  will  gain  a  basic understanding  of  documentary  photography  history  and  principles  through 
writing reactions to assigned books and films about documentary principles.  Students will establish personal methods to 
focus on the meaning and content of their pictures, the quality of their pictures and the way they observe the world around 
them.  Prerequisites: PHOT 207 or PHOT 208, PHOT 205.   

MULT 295, 395,495: SPECIAL TOPICS 

MULT 296, 396, 496: INDEPENDENT STUDY 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

MUS – MUSIC 

MUS 101    Music Appreciation 

3 credits 

Selected compositions to develop an appreciation of music through guided musical experiences, biographical materials 
and  critical  comments  on  composers  and  modes.  Listening  experience  is  provided.  Attendance  at  professional  musical 
performances is required.  

MUS 106    Piano Class 

1 credit 

Music fundamentals and basic theory through keyboard techniques, sight reading and eurhythmics utilizing beginning 
materials.  Recommended  for  anyone  interested  in  learning  to  play  the  piano  from  the  beginning  level  or  refreshing 
beginning skills. Open to all university students. Strongly recommended for Education and Dance majors. 

MUS 111, MUS 112  Private Voice I, II  

1 credit 

Techniques and principles of vocal performance within a private, one-to-one context. Materials may be selected from 
the  classical,  musical  theatre  or  contemporary  repertoire  according  to  student  level.  Includes  studio  recitals  and  jury 
evaluations. Prerequisites: Acceptance to BFA MT program, THEA 116 and audition, THEA 117 and audition.  

MUS 113, MUS 114  Private Piano I, II 

1 credit 

Techniques  and  principles  of  piano  performance  within  a  private,  one-to-one  context.  Materials  focus  on  piano 
literature,  technique  and  sight  reading  skills  chosen  according  to  student  level.  Includes  studio  and  jury  evaluations. 
Prerequisite: MUS 106, or MUS 124, or audition.    

MUS 123   Music Theory/Piano/Sight Singing Part I 

2 credits 

An introduction to music theory through written and aural demonstration, keyboard skills, and sight-singing with 

particular attention to those skills necessary for musical theatre.  

MUS 124   Music Theory/Piano/Sight Singing Part II 

2 credits 

A continuation of music theory studies through written and aural demonstration, keyboard skills, and sight-singing 
with particular attention to those skills necessary for musical theatre. Opportunities for private piano study are available 

345 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
upon course completion. Prerequisites: MUS 123.  

MUS 201   Point Park University Singers 

1 credit 

The course may be taken up to four times for credit. The University Singers is open to all majors. A variety of music 
(classical, pop, jazz, gospel). culminates in a performance each term. Prerequisite: Audition or interview (may be taken for 
zero credit) 

MUS 203    Voice Class I 

2 credits 

An  examination  of  the  processes  of  singing  and  speaking  in  the  classroom  and  other  performance/interaction 
situations. A variety of exercises and materials at both group and individual levels to improve performance/communication 
skills. Open to all university students. Strongly recommended for Dance majors. NOTE: Each individual student will work 
at his or her individual level.  

MUS 205    Solfege 

3 credits 

A basic approach to music theory through materials of sight singing, aural training and rhythmic dictation. Students 
are expected to improve skills in analyzing and singing materials at sight. Offered as preparation for further work in music 
theory.  

MUS 206    Music Theory 

3 credits 

Foundations of music fundamentals, analysis of harmonic materials and aural exercises. Opportunities to analyze, 

criticize and develop original materials. Prerequisites: THEA 123 and THEA 135, or Instructor’s Permission.  

MUS 211, MUS 212  Private Voice III, IV  

1 credit 

Continuation  of  MUS  111.Techniques  and  principles  of  vocal  performance  within  a  private,  on-to-one  context. 
Materials may be selected from the classical, musical theatre, or contemporary repertoire according to student level. Includes 
studio recitals and jury evaluations. Prerequisites: MUS 111,MUS 112.  

MUS 213, MUS 214 Private Piano III, IV 

Continuation of MUS 114. Prerequisite: MUS 114.  

MUS 220   Musicianship 

1 credit 

2 credits 

A participatory exploration and integration of basic music techniques through a variety of material and styles. Activities 
may include aural skills, theory fundamentals, introductory song analysis, and ensemble experiences. Opportunities for 
original composition or other creative work as semester project. Prerequisites: MUS 124 or By Permission.  

MUS 223   Ensemble Singing I 

2 credits 

Development of skills necessary for ensemble singing through sight-singing, score analysis and vocal techniques. The 
course will focus on pre-1970’s musical theatre repertoire. Prerequisites: Sophomore standing in Musical Theatre program 
and minimum C average in MUS123, MUS124 and THEA137. 

MUS 224   Ensemble Singing II 

2 credits 

Continuation of MUS 223, with further development of skills necessary for ensemble singing through sight-singing, 
score analysis and vocal techniques. The course will focus on contemporary musical theatre repertoire. Prerequisites: MUS 
223. 

MUS 311, MUS 312  Private Voice V, VI 

1 credit 

Continuation of MUS 211, MUS 212.Techniques and principles of vocal performance within a private, one-to-one 
context.  Materials may be selected from the classical, musical theatre, or contemporary repertoire according to student 
level. Includes studio recitals and jury evaluations. Prerequisite: MUS 212.  

MUS 313, MUS 314  Private Piano V, VI  

Continuation of MUS 214. Prerequisite: MUS 214.  

MUS 411, MUS 412 Private Voice VII, VIII 

1 credit 

1 credit 

Continuation of MUS 311,MUS 312. Techniques and principles of vocal performance within a private, one-to-one 
context.  Materials may be selected from the classical, musical theatre, or contemporary repertoire according to student 
level. Includes studio recitals and jury evaluations. Prerequisite: MUS 312.  

346 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MUS 413, MUS 414  Private Piano VII, VIII 

Continuation of MUS 314. Prerequisite: MUS 314.  

MUS  194, MUS  294        Special Topics                                                               

MUS 295, MUS 395, MUS 495  Special Topics in Music I, II, III 

MUS 296, MUS 396, MUS 496  Independent Study in Music I, II, III 

1 credit 

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

NSET – NATURAL SCIENCES, ENGINEERING, AND TECHNOLOGY 

NSET 110   Introduction to the Physical and Space Science 

3 credits 

An  introductory  course  designed  to  allow  students  to  explore  the  basic  concepts  of  physical  and  space  science. 
Concepts  to  be  covered  include  kinematics,  thermodynamics,  electricity  and  magnetism,  waves,  atomic  structure  of 
elements, radioactivity, the Universe, galaxies, the solar system and life cycle of stars. This course is intended for non-science 
majors. 

NSET 111   Introduction to the Life Sciences 

3 credits 

An introductory course in the life sciences designed for students who are interested in learning more about cells and 
the  fundamental  processes  of  life.  The  course  is  designed  to  introduce  students  to  concepts,  including  basic  aspects  of 
chemistry  as  they  relate  to  life,  cells,  cellular  structures  and  functions,  cell  division,  nucleic  acids,  Mendelian  genetics, 
proteins, biodiversity and evolution, and human systems. This course is intended for non-science majors. 

NSET 122   The Science of Light 

3 credits 

In this course students will investigate what light is as well as what light does. Our very existence depends on the energy 
provided by visible and invisible light from the sun, and mankind’s continued development of technology to take advantage 
of the properties of light can be traced back to as early as 1900 B.C.E. The class discussions will be related to the work being 
done in the laboratory. Through lecture and lab experiments, students explore some of the fundamental properties of light 
and how these properties are utilized to enrich our lives and define their environments. Experiments in the lab consists of 
exploring  the  themes  of  reflection,  refraction,  lenses  &  optical  instruments,  dispersion,  light  &  color,  interference, 
polarization, diffraction & interference, and other applications. 

NSET 130  Owner’s Manual for the Human Body 

3 credits 

A survey of the human body, including the skin, skeleton, and muscles, as well as the respiratory, circulatory, digestive, 

excretory, nervous, endocrine, and reproductive systems. 

NSET 131  Impacts of Microbes and Infectious Diseases on History 

3 credits 

This  course  examines  the  many  ways  infectious  diseases  have  impacted  history.    It  provides  examples  of  several 
important infectious diseases that have impacted civilizations, religion, war, immigration and even science.  We will aim to 
reinterpret historical facts in the light of infectious disease and understand how microbes have affected and altered history.  
The course will cover diseases including The Black Plague, Syphilis, Smallpox, Influenza, Ebola, Mumps and other lesser-
known diseases. 

                                                                                                               3 credits 

NSET 133   Kinesiology 
         This course is designed to provide students with a foundation for understanding the relationship between the 
skeletal and muscular systems of the body and how they correlate in the creation of movement. Other course components 
include the analysis of movement, referencing the Cardinal Planes of Action and associated movements with each of these 
Planes of Action. This course will also focus on anatomical alignment for the purpose of increasing movement potential 
and  encouraging  effective  training  methodologies  to  reduce  injury.  Specific  attention  will  be  placed  on  joint  actions, 
identifying the agonist muscles responsible for creating movement and the antagonist muscles responsible for joint stability. 
The course format is designed to provide students with a variety of experiential learning exercises, including: lectures, group 
discussions, presentations, lab/movement studies, quizzes, and exams. 

NSET 160   Environmental Science 

3 credits 

Students will investigate environmental science topics, with a focus on the relationship between humans and their 
environment.  Topics  include  earth  systems  and  resources,  the  living  world,  population,  land  and  water  use,  energy 
sustainability, pollution and global change. 

347 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NSET 181   Astronomy, Space, and Time 

3 credits 

This course is an introduction to the science of astronomy and astrophysics-planets, stars, galaxies, the physics of the 
cosmos, and our relationships to it all. In this course, students will investigate not just the facts of the universe, but how 
the scientific process is used to find them. Students will examine how we know where and when we are in the universe. 
Students will learn how stars work, how solar systems form, how galaxies evolve, how astronomers study exotic objects like 
neutron stars and black holes, and how they measure the distances to all of them. Students will also look at the evidence 
for how the universe began, its mysterious dark matter and dark energy, how it might end.  

NSET 182   Are We Alone? The Search for Life in the Universe 

3 credits 

Are we alone in the Universe? This course will use this question as a lens to explore astrobiology, the study of life in 
the universe. Throughout this course, students will apply critical thinking and evidence-based reasoning to come up with 
their own answer to this mystery. Students will examine keep topics in astronomy, geology, biology, chemistry, and other 
fields to investigate this question from all angles. Ultimately, students will make their own evidence-based conclusions about 
whether life exists elsewhere in the cosmos, where we might find it, and what it might mean if we don’t.  

NSET 218  Technical Communication 

3 credits 

Development of skills in expository writing and speaking for students and professionals in science and technology.  
The techniques for writing directions, proposals, summaries, reports, and correspondence are covered.  Techniques for 
effective  oral  presentation  are  included  as  well.   Writing-in-disciplines  class.    Prerequisites:  ENGL 101; availability  of  a 
personal computer with a word-processing program and Internet access; basic computer skills in word processing and use 
of on-line resources such as the World Wide Web. 

NSET 243   Anatomy and Physiology for Dancers 

3 credits 

A basic study of cell and tissue structure and function of the skeletal, muscular and nervous systems as they relate to 
kinesiology.  Other  systems  that  will  be  covered  are  the  integumentary,  circulatory,  digestive,  respiratory,  excretory, 
hormonal  and  reproductive.  Emphasis  of  the  course  is  on  the  integrating  functioning  of  these  systems  to  maintain 
homeostasis. 

NSET 355, NSET 356   Natural Science and Engineering Technology Internship I, II 

3 credits 

A faculty member directs students in the preparation of specified papers and reports related to the work experience, 
evaluates and grades the course and requires summation at conclusion of the work project. Prerequisite: Junior standing. 

NSET 455, NSET 456  Natural Science and Engineering Technology Internship III, IV 

      3 credits 

A faculty member directs students in the preparation of specified papers and reports related to the work experience, 
evaluates and grades the course and requires summation at conclusion of the work project. Prerequisite: Senior standing. 

NSET 470   Case Studies in Environmental Science 

3 credits 

Students in this course will analyze historical and present day case studies in environmental science.  They will do this 
by reading both scientific literature and media reports about a given case.  Students will learn to understand both of these 
approaches to the case and to effectively communicate about environmental science.  Prerequisites:  NSET 160, Senior 
Standing. 

NSET 490   Funeral Service Capstone 

3 credits 

Students will synthesize the skills acquired in the Clinical Embalming Practicum Experience at the Pittsburgh Institute 
of Mortuary Science with coursework in one of the programs in Funeral Service in writing and orally.  This course will serve 
as the Capstone course for all Funeral Service Programs.  This course cannot be completed without documentation of 
successful completion of CL EMB and PIMS. 

NSET 194, NSET 294       Special Topics                                                                   

3 credits  

NSET 295, NSET 395, NSET 495  Special Topics in NSET I, II, III  

NSET 296, NSET 396, NSET 496  Independent Study in NSET I, II, III  

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

348 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PADM – PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 

PADM 105  Applied Public Administration Workshops 

1-6 credits 

To increase professional competency in field situations, intensive weekend workshops are offered primarily on a non-
degree,  no-credit  basis.  However,  they  can  be  applied  as  advanced  standing  credit  to  the  Public  Administration  degree 
program. 

PADM 205  Urban Politics 

3 credits 

This course identifies and explores the political, governmental and community conceptualizations of problems and 
solutions in an urban environment. The course will focus on the interaction between elected officials, community groups 
and government leaders. Pre-requisite: POLS 202. 

PADM 206 Non-Profit Organizations  

3 credits 

This  course  is  an  introduction  to  leadership  in  nonprofit  organizations  (NPO).  Topics  include  the  theoretical, 

historical and legal foundations of NPOs, governance, fundraising, accountability, personnel and ethics.  

PADM 210  Public Administration 

3 credits 

This course is an intensive study of governmental and non-profit organizations, including organizational structures 
and functions, including planning, budget, finance, management and leadership. The course emphasizes the interaction 
and interrelationship of agencies and administrators at all levels of government and the non-profit sector. 

PADM 211  Principles of Management 

3 credits 

Emphasis  on  the  major  theories  and  functions  of  management.  Students  develop  an  understanding  of  why 
management  is  needed  in  all  organizations  and  what  constitutes  good  management.    Dual  listed  as  BMGT  208.  Pre-
requisite: BMGT 101 or PADM 210. 

PADM 214  Public Budgeting and Finance 

3 credits 

This  course  addresses  the  principles  of  governmental  and  non-profit  organizations’  revenue,  expenditure  and 
budgeting.  A  special  focus  is  placed  on  the  planning  and  management  aspects  of  budgeting,  and  the  associated 
measurements and evaluation. Pre-requisite: PADM 210 or PADM 206 or permission. 

PADM 301  Operational Methods for Public Management 

3 credits 

This course applies quantitative analysis and forecasting methods to plan and evaluate decisions in public agencies. 
Additional  topics  include  basic  research  design  and  techniques,  and  reading  and  interpreting  research  findings.  Pre-
requisites: PADM 210 and MATH 150; ECON 201 or 202 or permission of the instructor.. 

PADM 302 Leading Organizational Change 

3 credits 

Examines the role of the leader as change agent within an organization. Students will develop knowledge and skills in 
strategic leadership, consensus building, conflict management, overcoming resistance to change, performance evaluation, 
and selected organization development interventions. Dual listed as LEAD 315. 

PADM 303 Policy and Decision Analysis  

3 credits 

This course will cover quantitative, qualitative and mixed-methods approaches to defining, structuring, analyzing and 
evaluating policies and decisions in government and non-profit agencies. Pre-requisites: PADM 210 and MATH 150 (or 
greater) or permission of the instructor. 

PADM 308  Theories of Public Organization 

3 credits 

Organizational structure affects the function and performance of public agencies. Topics in this course include the 
elements, concepts and principles of organizational theories and leadership development in government and non-profit 
agencies. Pre-requisite: PADM 210 or BMGT 208 or permission. 

PADM 311  Special Employee Relations in Public Agencies 

3 credits 

This course includes the legal and managerial considerations regarding human resources and employee relations in 
government and non-profit agencies. Special emphasis will be on civil service employees and those represented by collective 
bargaining  units,  including  negotiation  and  dispute  resolution  processes.  Additional  topics  include  special  personnel 
relationships, such as contract and temporary employees, and volunteers in public service. Pre-requisite: PADM 210 or 
PADM 206 or BMGT 207 or BMGT 208 or permission. 

349 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PADM 312  Introduction to Administrative Law 

3 credits 

This  course  provides  a  foundation  in  constitutional,  statutory,  common  and  agency-made  law  as  it  applies  to  the 

powers, procedures and judicial review of public agencies. Prerequisite: PADM 210 or BMGT 201 or POLS 209. 

PADM 314  Public Budgeting and Finance II  

3 credits 

This course is a continuation of PADM214 and focuses on gathering and analyzing data to build and present line 

item and program budgets, narratives and presentations.  This course will include the use of computer spreadsheet 
applications (such as MS Excel).  Prerequisite: PADM 214 or permission of instructor.   

PADM 317  Legal Aspects of Nonprofit Organizations  

3 credits 

This course presents an overview of the legal and ethical issues confronting non-profit organizations. Prerequisites: 

PADM 206 or PADM 210 or permission. 

PADM 320  Emergency and Disaster Preparedness  

3 credits 

Emergencies and disasters affect the business, non-profit and governmental sectors, as well as residents, customers and 
employees. This course will introduce the student to the types of disasters faced by the community and the preparedness 
measures necessary for organizational continuity of operations and business recovery. Dual listed as BMGT 222. 

PADM 322  Disaster Planning and Control 

3 credits 

This course examines the concepts and principles of community risk assessment and response to and recovery from 
natural and man-made disasters.  The focus of the course will be on the legal and organizational frameworks, roles and 
responsibilities of public, non-profit and private agencies in preparedness and response. Pre-requisite: PADM 210; PADM 
222 or permission. 

PADM 330 Fire and Emergency Services Administration 

3 credits 

This course is designed to be a progressive primer for students who want more knowledge about fire and emergency 
services administration.  The course demonstrates the importance of the following skills, necessary to manage and lead a 
fire  and  emergency  services  department  through  the  challenges  and  changes  of  the  21st  century.    Prerequisite:  Junior 
Standing or prior Fire/EMS experience. 

PADM 331 Political and Legal Foundations of Fire Protection  

3 credits 

This course examines the legal aspects of the fire service and the political and social impacts of legal issues.  This course 
includes a review of the American legal system and in-depth coverage of legal and political issues involving employment 
and personnel matters, administrative and operational matters, planning and code enforcement, and legislative and political 
processes with regard to the fire service.  Prerequisite: Junior status or prior Fire/EMS experience. 

PADM 332 Fire Prevention Organization and Management 

3 credits 

This  course  examines  the  factors  that  shape  fire  risk  and  the  tools  for  fire  prevention,  including  risk  reduction 
education, codes and standards, inspection and plans review, fire investigation, research, master planning, various types of 
influences, and strategies.  Prerequisite: Junior Standing or prior Fire/EMS experience. 

PADM 335 Personnel Management for Fire and Emergency Services 

3 credits 

The course examines relationships and issues in personnel administration and human resource development within 
the  context  of  fire-related  organizations,  including  personnel  management,  organizational  development,  productivity, 
recruitment  and  selection,  performance  management  systems,  disciple  and  collective  bargaining.    Prerequisite:  Junior 
Standing or prior Fire/EMS experience. 

PADM 336 Community Planning and Risk Reduction  

3 credits 

This course provides a theoretical framework for understanding the ethical. Sociological, organizational, political and 
legal components of community planning and risk reduction. Topics include comprehensive planning, zoning, building, 
fire and life safety codes. Pre-requisite: PADM 210 or permission 

PADM 340 Foundations of Emergency Medical Services 

3 credits 

An overview of the design and operation of emergency medical services (EMS) systems, delivery of services, and the 
echelons of care.  The history of EMS, the interface of public and private organizations and review of the various personnel 
who comprise these systems will be examined in relation to their impact on the health care delivery system.  Prerequisite: 
Junior Standing or prior Fire/EMS experience.  

350 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PADM 341 EMS Management 

3 credits 

This course provides the emergency medical services (EMS) leader with the knowledge, skills and abilities necessary 
for  high  performance  services.    Topics  include  interagency  relations,  strategic  planning,  personnel  development,  fleet 
management,  data  collection,  communications  and  incident  management  for  private,  government  and  volunteer-based 
services.  Prerequisites: Junior Standing or prior Fire/EMS experience.   

PADM 342 EMS Community Risk Reduction      

3 credits 

This course explores the health and injury risks faced by our communities, the demands they place on the emergency 
medical  service  (EMS)  system,  and  public  education  and  prevention  strategies  to  reduce  their  impact.    Topics  include 
determining and understanding community demographics, morbidity and mortality studies, emergency care resources and 
effective communication of risk and prevention.  Prerequisite: Junior Standing or prior Fire/EMS experience.   

PADM 345 EMS Safety and Risk Management     

3 credits 

This course introduces the student to the risk management principles of an EMS agency.  The emphasis is on safety 

from the perspective of the field provider.  Prerequisite: Junior Standing or prior Fire/EMS experience.   

PADM 346 Legal, Political, and Regulatory Issues in EMS  

3 credits 

This course examines the legal aspects of emergency medical services (EMS) and the political and social impacts of 
legal issues.  This course includes a review of the American legal system and in-depth coverage of legal and political issues 
involving operations, personnel, healthcare regulations, reimbursement and insurance.  Prerequisite: Junior Standing or 
prior Fire/EMS experience.  

PADM 381 History Perspective & Reading  

3 credits 

This  course  will  explore  historical  events  and  individuals  who  shaped  leadership,  organizational  and  commerce 
practices of a variety of organizational types. A special focus is placed on the role of history’s transferrable lessons to modern 
organizations. 

PADM 405 Leading Nonprofit Organizations 

3 credits 

Examines approaches to leading non-profit organizations. In this course, students will explore the key tenets of mission-
focused  leadership,  how  non-profit  organizations  build  capacity,  organize  volunteers,  create  strategic  alliances,  develop 
fundraising strategies, and optimize community as well as board member relationships. Prerequisite: PADM 214, PADM 
317 and SAEM 440. 

PADM 410 Advanced Seminar in Applied Public Management 

3 credits 

Designed to capstone other course in the PADM major, this course presents advanced applications of the principles 

of public administration. Prerequisites: Junior Standing and five courses in Public Administration. 

PADM 411 Public Administration Internship 

3 credits 

 A field experience in areas directly related to public sector employment. Evaluated on a satisfactory/unsatisfactory 
basis, proficiency requirements are determined through a student contract with the supervising faculty member. Offered 
during the Fall and Spring terms. Prerequisites: Junior Standing and five courses in Public Administration. 

PADM 430 Applications of Fire Research 

3 credits 

This course examines the basic principles of research and methodology for analyzing current fire-related research.  The 
course also provides a framework for conducting and evaluating independent research in the following areas: fire dynamics, 
fire  test  standards  and  codes,  fire  safety,  fire  modeling,  structural  fire  safety,  life  safety,  firefighter  health  and  safety, 
automatic detection and suppression, transportation fire hazards, risk analysis and loss control, fire service applied research 
and new trends in fire-related research.  Prerequisite: Senior Standing and PADM 301 or PADM 303, or permission of 
instructor.   

PADM 440 EMS Quality and Performance Management     

3 credits 

How do we know that emergency medical services (EMS) are meeting the standards and needs of the community?  The 
course includes quantitative, qualitative and mixed methods research approaches, applies to quality assurance, program 
evaluation and customer service to validate and improve patient care and transport.  Prerequisite: Senior Standing and 
PADM 301 or PADM 303, or permission of instructor.   

PADM 194, PADM 294   Selected Topics   

1-6 credits 

PADM 295, PADM 395, PADM 495 Special Topics in Public Administration I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

351 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PADM 296, PADM 396, PADM 496 Independent Study in Public Administration I, II, III  

   1-6 credits 

PHIL – PHILOSOPHY 

PHIL 100    Introduction to Philosophy 

3 credits 

The  nature  of  philosophy,  its  aims,  methods  and  problems,  in  an  atmosphere  of  questioning  such  issues  as  our 

knowledge of reality, the existence of God, concepts of self-identity, and ethics and morality. 

PHIL 103   Introduction to Logic and Scientific Method 

3 credits 

Principles  of  precise  thinking  and  techniques  of  detecting  fallacies  including  the  nature  and  use  of  language,  the 

methods of definition and of deductive reasoning and the testing of scientific hypotheses. 

PHIL 201    Critical Thinking 

3 credits 

This course studies the strategies, techniques and principles of effective problem-solving, decision making and critical 
analysis. Emphasis is placed on the development of critical thinking skill and their application.  Prerequisite: ENGL 101. 

PHIL 210    Existentialism 

3 credits 

Study of existential philosophies of human nature, morality, social obligation and human knowledge. 

PHIL 215    World Religions 

3 credits 

Examination of philosophical assumptions and implications of belief systems represented by world religions such as 
Buddhism, Taoism, Hinduism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, as well as naturalism, agnosticism and atheism. The course 
will explore metaphysical, epistemological, and ethical assumptions and implications of various religions, anti-religious, and 
non-religious worldviews. 

PHIL 240   Ethics in the Professions 

3 credits 

Focuses on major ethical systems and theories regarding the development of moral behavior, the relationship between 

morality and the law, and applied ethics in professional settings. 

PHIL 194,  PHIL 294       Special Topics                                                                   

PHIL 295, PHIL 395, PHIL 495  Special Topics in Philosophy I, II, III 

PHIL 296, PHIL 396, PHIL 496  Independent Study in Philosophy I, II, III  

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

PHOT – PHOTOGRAPHY  

PHOT 101  Photography for Non-Majors 

 3 credits 

Photography has been  constantly  changing  as  technological  developments  allow  for  endless  experimentation.  This 
class is designed to allow students to become familiar with visual arts and the artistic process using the camera as a tool for 
personal expression. Photography will be approached through several lenses including smart phones, digital and film SLR's, 
as well as darkroom processing. Topics will include photojournalism, conceptual photography/art, and studio photography 
(commercial, portraiture and still life). Students will be encouraged to research photographers and industry styles based on 
topics supplied by the instructor. Additionally, students will obtain experience in a number of photographic areas and will 
build an understanding of what kind of careers can be obtained through photography. 

PHOT 110  Foundations of Art & Design I                                                                          

3 credits 

Understanding the Foundations of Art & Design is essential to art and design practices, critical thinking, and the 
comprehension  and  application  of  principles  within  visual  art  expression.  This  course  entails  hands-on  creation  while 
emphasizing  creative  and  critical  thinking,  perception  and  observation,  problem  solving,  visual  analysis,  as  well  as 
identifying vocabulary, theory, media, and the techniques of studio practice. 

PHOT 204  Film and Darkroom Photography I 

3 credits 

In this introductory photography course, students will become familiar with visual arts and the artistic process of using 

352 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a camera for personal expression. PHOT 204 allows hands-on experience and introduces the technique of an SLR film 
camera,  developing  and  printing  in  the  darkroom.  Students  will  learn  to  discuss  and  analyze  photography  through 
structured critiques. Students are encouraged to have their own film SLR cameras for this course (must have adjustable lens 
openings, shutter speeds and full manual control).  

PHOT 205  Digital Photography      

3 credits 

A basic digital photography course designed to give photography and photojournalism students proficiency in digital 
image making and processing. It stresses the importance and uses of digital photography in the current media environment, 
including  terminology,  practical  exercise,  and  presentation.  Students  utilize  Adobe  Lightroom  for  editing,  and  are 
encouraged to purchase the program and their own digital SLR cameras.  

PHOT 207  History of Photography  

 3 credits 

This course surveys the origins and development phases of photography as invention and visual medium. Students 
will  examine  technical  innovations  with  emphasis  on  historical  motivations  and  changing  climates  of  aesthetic  intent, 
philosophical rationale, and visual experimentation in the history of photography from the early 19th century to the mid-
20th century. 

PHOT 209  Body and the Lens 

3 credits 

Employing  photography  as  an  analytical  and  social  tool,  this  course  surveys  how  the  human  body  is  represented 
through images, both historical and contemporary. Students will investigate and analyze situations where gender, race, class 
and power became instrumental themes in how we look at and interpret images of others. 

PHOT 309  Film and Darkroom Photography II 

3 credits 

An  intermediate  course  emphasizing  individualized  photographic  assignments  and  perfecting  darkroom  skills  by 
utilizing the zone system and producing quality prints. Students explore theory in greater depth and further develop their 
stills and ability to analyze and critique photographs. A wider range of film camera formats and photographic materials are 
introduced. Students must provide their own 35mm SLR cameras. Prerequisite: PHOT 204. 

PHOT 310  View Camera Techniques 

 3 credits 

View  Camera  Techniques  is  an  intermediate,  technically  intensive  film  course  emphasizing  use  of  large-format 
cameras.  Students learn how to expose and process 4x5 inch sheet film and produce high-quality, fine-grained negatives, 
which offer extraordinary clear printing capabilities.  The view camera course allows greater pictorial control and investigates 
technical and aesthetic aspects of the medium.  Instant film processing and drum scanning will also be addressed.  Cameras, 
tripods and film holders and provided, but students must supply all additional materials such as film, darkroom paper, and 
light meters.  Prerequisites:  PHOT 309. 

PHOT 311  Experimental Photography 
       Experimental  Photography  is  an  advanced  production  course  that  investigates  experimental  and  nontraditional 
applications of color and black and white imaging materials and processes. Historical and contemporary experimental work 
will be examined. Emphasis is on the expressive and visual significance of experimentally generated imagery. Prerequisites: 
PHOT 309. 

3 credits 

PHOT 316  Studio Lighting 

 3 credits 

This  course  examines  photographic  image  making  through  a  critical  survey  of  controlled  lighting  applications. 
Students are introduced to various professional lighting techniques with an emphasis on the safe handling of studio tools 
and  equipment.  Photographic  techniques  focus  on  the  application  and  construction  for  commercial  and  fine  art 
production. Students will engage with industry standard professional lighting equipment, image capturing software, and 
develop a working sense of how a professional lighting studio is organized . Prerequisite: PHOT 205. 

PHOT 322  Color Photography 

3 credits 

Color Photography introduces color photographic materials, both digital and analog, and their implementation into 
the  image-making  practice  within  the  photography  major.  Throughout  the  course  color  materials  are  explored  and 
researched  to  develop  skills  in  color  photographic  practice  and  create  images  that  communicate  your  vision.  An 
understanding  of  color  theory  and  its  application  in  the  image  making  process  in  tandem  with  developing  carefully 
considered projects is vital for successful photographic growth. This course continues to expand and build on the visual 
communication and critical analysis forms addressed in previous courses.  Exposure techniques, significance of varied light 
sources, film characteristics, and presentation methods are explored in the development of projects to enhance and support 
the intention of the work. Discussions and course work focuses on the balance between these elements of color photography 
and continued development in visual communications.  Prerequisite: PHOT 309. 

353 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHOT 340  Specialized Photography 

 3 credits 

Students will obtain experience in a number of specialized photographic areas by completing assignments on deadline 
and creating work to include in their portfolios. Photographic topics vary according to the instructor and the course is 
repeatable. Prerequisite: JOUR 215, PHOT 204, PHOT 205. 

PHOT 350  Digital Image Editing  

3 credits 

Students  will  prepare  digital  photographs  for  publication  in  print  and  online.  Progressing  from  introductory  to 
intermediate skills in Adobe Photoshop, students will digitally montage/collage imagery to build a portfolio. This course 
addresses the history of photo editing and the ethics of photo manipulation. Critiques will be an integral part of the course. 
Prerequisite: PHOT 205. Dual listed as PHOT 501. 

PHOT 351  Digital Printing Methodology   

3 credits 

Students explore advanced technical controls of the printmaking workflows of digital imaging. Students experience 
input and output variances that affect the final print and portfolio. Analysis and adjustment is expected in every stage of 
image production from black-and-white to color printing.  Prerequisite(s): PHOT 350. 

PHOT 360  Alternative Photographic Processes I  
        The photographic medium has changed rapidly since its inception. While many photographers have settled into a 
digitally-orientated workplace, there have been an increasing number of contemporary artists looking back at the medium’s 
history in search of more conceptually-driven forms of output. This has expanded the expressive choices for artists, who 
often combine processes from the advent of photography with the latest advances in digital media. 

3 credits 

PHOT 361  Alternative Photographic Process II   

3 credits 

This advanced course continues with the exploration of non-silver photographic printmaking and print-manipulation 
processes  that  depart  from  the  more  prevalent  black-and-white,  color  and  digital  approaches.  With  dual  emphasis  on 
developing technical skills and creative application of the medium, students will gain an understanding of both the craft of 
historic  photographic  processes  and  photography’s  function  within  contemporary  art  as  they  create  their  own  images. 
Processes covered may include bromoil, kirlian photography and others not previously covered in PHOT 360. Students are 
expected to sharpen technical proficiency, solve problems and spend longer periods of time on a single process. 

PHOT 365  Experimental Video  

3 credits 

This course explores video as photographic writing, in particular, through the making of video from idea through 
realization and display. This will be accomplished through exploring and experimenting with methods, techniques, software 
and  equipment  to  manipulate the  moving  image  aesthetically and  artistically.  Students  are  expected  to  produce  several 
projects, which emphasize ideas outside the traditional narrative and documentary forms and are encouraged to develop 
their  own  form  of  expression.  Students  will  establish  personal  methods  to  focus  on  the  meaning  and  content  of  their 
moving pictures, the quality of their images and the way they observe the world around them. Students show and critique 
their work in class weekly in preparation for a final project and screenings at the end of the term. Prerequisites: PHOT 205, 
JOUR 215. 

PHOT 368  Exploring Art Through Prose 

3 credits 

This writing intensive course explores situated topics in visual arts and photography via self-generated student work, 
which will include art criticism, artist statements, thesis writing, and aesthetic statements—as well as exposure to the genre 
of writing as it pertains to art. Through discussions, assigned readings and in-class exercise, students are expected to produce 
a significant output of original creative work that emphasizes annotation of published authors and artists, and requires 
modulation of style and rhetoric. The course will also address some aspects of professionalization—exposure and evaluation 
of artist statements, attendance at art shows in the Pittsburgh area, and workshops in how to place their work. In doing so, 
students will establish both a creative writing style that is individual to their own artistic background and interests, as well 
as structure their knowledge of the contemporary artistic field of their choice. Course Prerequisites: ENGL 101. 

PHOT 370  Contemporary Issues in Photography 
        This course is a survey to various and discursive approaches to contemporary art photographic practices. Because this 
class is designed for undergraduates interested in working in photography, many of the readings are critical pieces written 
by artists and scholars whose practice is, in whole or in part, deeply engaged with photography and various cultural debates 
within the field. In an effort to push beyond conventional ideas of what qualities are considered intrinsic to photography 
as well as what constitutes photographic meaning, students  discuss and rethink a range of traditional photographic art 
categories  in  relation  to  larger  issues  such  as  visual  culture,  art  and  technology,  historical  circumstances,  political 
geographies, contemporary art criticism, and interdisciplinary art practices. Prerequisite(s): PHOT 368. 

3 credits 

354 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHOT 375  Self-Publishing the Photobook 

3 credits 

As a continually evolving and expansive outlet for photographers, the photobook has never been more relevant, yet 
more increasingly difficult to define. Through research, theory, and practice, this course investigates the current aesthetic 
trends  within  self-publishing.  Photographers  will  complete  a  series  of  publishing  assignments,  both  independently  and 
collaboratively,  in  and  out  of  class.  Photographers  will  also  develop  an  understanding  and  mastery  of  different  self-
publishing techniques and options as well as build an awareness of exhibition outlets. Upon completion of this course, 
students  will  have  knowledge  and  skill  set  to  incorporate  self-publishing  into  their  art  making  practice.  Prerequisite(s): 
Student must have taken or currently enrolled in PHOT 350. 

PHOT 380  Contemporary Portraiture  

3 credits 

In  this  course  students  will  examine  portraiture  and  its  contemporary  implications  and  uses.  Combining  a  dual 
emphasis on proper technical skills and creative application of the photographic medium, students will develop strategies 
for creating portraits both in the studio and on location.  Furthermore, students will gain an appreciation for the myriad 
ways in which portraits are utilized in the photographic world, such as fashion, editorial, and fine art. Prerequisites: PHOT 
205, PHOT 316. 

PHOT 383  Constructed Still Life Photography  

3 credits 

This course will explore the genre of the still life, an essential facet of contemporary photography.  By focusing on 
technique as well as the creative possibilities of the photographic art form, this class will instruct students in the art of 
photographing still life, both in and out of the studio.  One of the oldest and most prevalent subjects throughout art history, 
the  still  life  has  commercial,  editorial,  and  fine  art  applications  that  will  be  discussed  and  explored  in  this  course. 
Prerequisites: PHOT 316 & PHOT 350. 

PHOT 385  Commercial and Editorial Photography  

3 credits 

Throughout this class, students will grow and develop their abilities in the practice and application of commercial and 
editorial photography.  While emphasizing both proper technical skills and the creative application of the medium, students 
will gain an understanding of the craft of commercial photography as they create their own images.  It will prepare students 
to  work  with  commercial  and  editorial  clients  through  individual  assignments  and  opportunities  for  collaborations.  
Students will also gain an understanding of the business of being a freelance photographer. Prerequisites: PHOT 316 & 
PHOT 350. 

PHOT 390  Advanced Photography  

3 credits 

This advanced level course facilitates discussion of photographic processes within the larger context of contemporary 
art,  photography,  film  and  digital  media.    The  course  will  emphasize  semester-long  projects,  the  process  involved  in 
generating a portfolio of images, a coherence body of work based upon a theme, concept, or selected subject matter. The 
class  will  discuss  topics  such  as  locating  an  individual  voice,  refining  a  working  process,  considering  methods  for 
presentation/distribution  of  photographs,  and  reflecting  on  current  issues  in  contemporary  art.  Organized  around  the 
major  activities  of  criticism  (describing,  interpreting,  evaluating  and  theorizing),  students  gain  a  clear  framework  and 
vocabulary necessary for critical skill development. Therefore, students are expected to build upon their artwork weekly. 
Lectures and demonstrations will include assembling a portfolio of photographs, submitting work for review, and preparing 
for exhibition. This course is a requirement for photography majors, and is repeatable as a major elective for up to nine 
additional credits. Course prerequisites: PHOT 205, PHOT 309, & PHOT 322. 

PHOT 400  Photographic Art Marketing 

3 credits 

Photographic  Art  Marketing  provides  self-motivated  students  with  direction  into  today's  dynamic  market  for 
photography. The course focuses on grant writing, networking, navigating gallery shows, developing resumes, CVs, portfolio 
development  and  what  it  means  to  be  a  professional  artist.  Classroom  lectures  cultivate  a  broader  awareness  of  career 
options and professional prospects for photographers seeking to pursue a successful career in the art world. Individual 
research and projects allow students to explore an area in depth. Students share their research methodology and results 
with their classmates, fostering growth of peer relationships. Prerequisite: PHOT350.  

PHOT 414  Professional Practices in Photography   

3 credits 

The course will expose the student to the essential business, law and marketing principles in the editorial, commercial 
and  fine  art  areas  of  the  photographic  industry.  Topics  covered  include  contracts,  copyright  law,  trade  organizations, 
working  with  non-profits,  defining  professional  grade  equipment,  the  stock  photo  industry,  creating  job  estimates, 
negotiation,  and  the  costs  of  doing  business  analysis.  In  addition,  financial,  legal,  organizational,  promotional, 
interpersonal, and ethical practices will be covered. The core assignment spans over the duration of the course, students 
create an analysis of who they are as photographer/artist by describing their brand, identifying who potential clients would 
be, and discussing a strategy for reaching those clients. Students must present a unified portfolio as part of the assignment 

355 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with strategic and tactical marketing applications. Prerequisite:  PHOT 350 

PHOT 481  Senior Thesis I 

3 credits 

This self-directed senior seminar  is designed to bring seniors together to discuss and develop their thesis projects, 
research  paper  and  exhibition  plans.  The  seminar  encourages  teamwork  on  developing  an  exhibition  and  the  ensuing 
professional practice in photography, continuing education, pricing strategies, presentation formats, and artist statements. 
In preparation for their career, students visit local artists’ studios and visiting artists provide feedback of work in progress. 
Prerequisite: ENGL 368, PHOT 310, PHOT 390, PHOT 400 & Passing JR Portfolio Review. 

PHOT 482  Senior Thesis II 

 3 credits 

A continuation of the work stated in Senior Thesis I, this segment of the course covers all areas of designing, 

implementing, promoting and installing an exhibition. Support and recommendations provide feedback during the 
developmental process of the projects for public galleries. In addition to the thesis paper, students will complete public 
exhibitions and compose artist statements, portfolios, resumes, and CVs in preparation for graduation. Prerequisite: 
PHOT 481. 

PHOT 490  Interdisciplinary Projects   

   3 credits 

This is the highest level course offered in the Photography Curriculum; designed as a one-on-one student/professor 
interaction, geared to prepare the student for real world art practices outside of the University. The purpose is to offer 
rigorous guidance on developing studio work in an interdisciplinary environment.  The emphasis on this course is on studio 
production and research.  Students work independently throughout the semester, and schedule weekly meetings with the 
instructor to check in on the progress of his/her artwork. Prerequisites:  Must have completed at least one PHOT 390 
Advanced Photography course and must hold at least a 3.8 GPA in the Photographic Major Electives.  Advisor approval is 
necessary for registration. 

PHOT 194, PHOT 294        Special Topics (CORE)                                                              3 credits 

PHOT 295, PHOT 395, PHOT 495  Special Topics I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

Courses are on subjects currently at issue or of interest to faculty/students in the photography field. Examples may be 
trends, experimental topics, integrated fields, and new technologies or important areas not covered by previously listed 
courses, such as multiculturalism, informational graphics or audio-visual techniques. Topics are selected by the department 
with regard to student/faculty input and current perceived needs. 

PHOT 296, PHOT 396, PHOT 496  Independent Study I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

The student independently studies subjects in the field not taught but of special interest to her or him and within the 
expertise  of  a  supervising  faculty  member.  A  well-developed,  written  proposal  from  the  student  and  agreement  of  an 
appropriate faculty supervisor are needed before registration. A final research paper or project is required. Prerequisite:  
Permission of faculty supervisor and chair. 

PHYS – PHYSICS 

PHYS 101   Physics I 

3 credits 

Basic concepts of physics including kinematics, dynamics, work and energy concepts, fluids and solids. Applications 

of these concepts to different disciplines. Algebra based. Laboratory section: PHYS 103. Prerequisites: MATH 180. 

PHYS 102   Physics II 

3 credits  

Vibration  and  wave  motion,  geometric  and  physical  optics,  electricity  and  magnetism.  Algebra  based.  Laboratory 

section: PHYS 104. Prerequisite: PHYS 101. 

PHYS 103   Physics Laboratory I 

Experimental techniques in mechanics, heat and sound. Prerequisite or co-requisite: PHYS 101.  

PHYS 104   Physics Laboratory II 

1 credit 

1 credit  

Experimental techniques in electricity and magnetism, optics, and atomic physics. Prerequisite or co-requisite: PHYS 

102.  

356 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHYS 201   Fundamental Physics I 

3 credits  

Introductory, calculus-based physics, including kinematics, dynamics, work and energy, fluids, and thermodynamics.  
Also includes applications of these concepts to different disciplines.  Associated lab: PHYS 103 (1 credit).  Prerequisites: 
MATH 190. 

PHYS 202   Fundamental Physics II 

3 credits  

Introductory,  calculus-based  physics,  including  vibration  and  wave  motion,  geometric  and  physical  optics,  and 
electricity and magnetism.  Associated labs:  PHYS 104 (1 credit).  Prerequisites: MATH 190, MATH 210, PHYS 201 or 
PHYS 101. 

PHYS 194, PHYS 294       Special Topics                                                                   

3 credits 

POLS – POLITICAL SCIENCE 

POLS 102   American National Government 

3 credits 

Examines  basic  principles,  institutions  and  functions  of  American  national  government  and  the  operation  of  the 
American political system and government. Identifies individual rights and responsibilities as citizens of local, state and 
national communities. 

POLS 202   State and Local Government  

3 credits 

Basic  principles,  institutions  and  functions  of  American  government  at  the  state  and  local  levels.  Emphasis  on 

Pennsylvania. 

POLS 205   World Geography 
  World Geography is the study of the geographic nature of the world’s major social, political, and economic processes 
and problems.  A central component of this class will be an analysis of the ways in which power has unevenly spread across 
the regions of the globe.  This course starts and ends with an analysis of commodity chains as a means to understand the 
connections between colonialism, post-colonial imperialism, and the geographies of capitalism; environmental geographies 
of exploitation and destruction; the ways in which the global economy is governed; the relationships between race and 
geography; the production of gendered geographies; the production of specifically sexualized spaces; and conflicts that arise 
over and in various spaces, places, territories, and borders.  By the end of the semester, students should have a firm grasp 
of geography’s principal concepts and a solid orientation to the geographic nature of the world’s major power inequalities 
and processes. 

3 credits 

POLS 207   Public Policy Issues 

3 credits 

Examines some of the most critical problems confronting America in the realms of domestic and international politics. 
Format of the class is primarily discussion with students using the daily and Sunday New York Times and other pertinent 
publications. 

POLS 209   Law and Society 

3 credits 

This course examines the origins and functions of the law, as it relates to society. Students gain an understanding on 
law, legal institutions and their relationship to social values and morality from critical perspectives, with a focus on how 
law achieves the balance between the interests of society and individual rights.  

POLS 215   Introduction to the American Legal System 
      This course is a comprehensive overview of the foundations in the American legal system; of the necessary elements 
for law enforcement, the prosecution of law, and the defense of human rights; and of the rules of litigation civil and criminal 
cases. Students participate in immersive experiences like a mock trial, field trips to the local courts, case preparation/legal 
writing. 

  3 credits 

POLS 250   Introduction to Politics 

3 credits 

This course is an overview of political science, including the basic theories, concepts and debates regarding political 
institutions  and  political  behavior.  Topics  include  ideologies  and  political  cultures,  political  actors  and  the  virtues  of 
political participation, the state, government systems (federal vs unitary, parliamentary vs. presidential, party systems, voting 
systems), political economy, democratization, and other processes at the level of domestic and world politics. 

357 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
POLS 276   Political Theory 

3 credits 

This  course  examines  classical  texts  of  political  philosophy  in  order  to  develop  critical  thinking  skills  and  teach 
important  concepts  relevant  for  the  tradition  of  Western  political  thought  (justice,  equality,  liberty,  the  rule  of  law, 
democracy, representation, etc.). Students learn to read and interpret philosophical texts, distinguish between empirical 
and normative statements and “use” the theoretical perspectives to solve real-world problems in a final project. No pre-
requisites. 

POLS 280   Power, Politics, and Society 
        What does power mean? How’s does it operate? And how is it contested? This course is an introduction to the 
subfield of political sociology, or the study of social power. Power and domination will be studies as they are wielded and 
contested primarily within the state-but also well beyond the state. Politics plays out within and between social 
institutions and social groups. In this course, social inequalities that result from the exercise of power and domination 
will be explored as will revolutions, social movements, and/or other forms of mass resistance. 

                                                                                   3 credits 

POLS 290 Human Rights in Theory and Practice 

3 credits 

This course examines human rights from various perspectives, historical, moral/philosophical, legal and political, and 
their contested meaning across countries and cultures. Students investigate how national governments implement human 
rights, and the boundaries of international human rights law. Case studies are used to discuss human rights abuses and the 
means  of  redress,  from  ad-hoc  tribunals,  regional  courts  of  human  rights  and  the  International  Criminal  Court,  to 
humanitarian  interventions  and  nation-building  processes  in  post-conflict  societies.  Students  will  carry-out  research  on 
human rights abuses and advocate for solutions. No prerequisites. 

POLS 300   Legal Analysis and Writing 

                                                                                  3 credits 

This course is an overview of legal analysis and writing. Students identify legal issues contained in a fact pattern, 
analyze statutes and cases, predicting the probable outcome of legal dispute, and communicating their legal analysis in 
writing. Students also learn the fundamentals of written advocacy by drafting case briefs, essays, memorandums of law, 
and other problem-solving assignments. 

POLS 305   Trial Law and Procedure 

3 credits 

An introduction to the rules governing trial procedures in civil and criminal lawsuits. Prerequisite: POLS 209. 

POLS 308   Principles of Criminal Justice 

3 credits 

An  examination  of  the  doctrine  and  principles  involved  in  criminal  law  through  analysis  of  cases  and  statutes. 

Prerequisite: POLS 209. 

POLS 330   The American Presidency 

3 credits 

The presidency as a major element of the American political system. The evolution of the leadership role in both 

domestic and foreign affairs. Prerequisite: POLS 102 or permission. 

POLS 335    American Foreign Policy 

3 credits 

The  institutions  and  processes  involved  in  foreign  policy  determinations.  Past  and  current  problems  of  American 

foreign relations. Prerequisite: POLS 102 or permission. 

POLS 350   Nationalism 

3 credits 

This  course  introduces  students  to  the  concepts  and  theories  regarding  nationalism,  ethnic-conflict,  and  nation 
building. Students learn the most prominent explanations/theories of the emergence of nationalism, the tools to evaluate 
them and the effects of nationalism on political identities, state formation(nation building),political violence, citizenship 
and migration. 

POLS 355, POLS 356 Internship in Government or Legal Services I, II 

3 credits 

A field experience in areas related to government or legal services. Proficiency requirements are determined through 
a student contract with the supervising faculty member and may include specific papers and reports related to the work 
experience. Prerequisite:  Junior Standing. 

POLS 358   Palestine/Israel: Politics, History, and Geography 

3 credits 

This course provides an introduction to the politics, history, and geography of Palestine/Israel as a means to elicit 
better understandings of geopolitical patterns across the region and around the world. Students will examine the roles 
played by global superpowers, nationalism, various ideologies, territorial disputes, settler colonialism, conflict diplomacy, 
and  movements  for  human  rights  in  the  ongoing  political-geographic  struggle  between  Palestine  and  Israel.  While 

358 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identifying the particular nuances to this case, the course illustrates the ways in which the violence and injustices related to 
Palestine/Israel are neither unique or inevitable. 

POLS 372  International Relations 

3 credits 

An examination of the major elements and persistent problems in the world community of states. Prerequisites: POLS 

250 or HIST 202 or permission. 

                                                                                           3 credits 

POLS 376   Theories of Justice 
        What is Justice? How can we realize our different conceptions of good life in harmony with each other, and what kind 
of  society  and  political  order  does  that  entail?  What  type  of  moral  obligations  and  global  arrangements  lead  to  just 
international order? By exploring the work of John Rawls and his critics, this course examines justice at both state and 
global  levels,  from  various  political  philosophical  perspectives  :utilitarian  ,conservative,  libertarian,  liberal,  and 
cosmopolitan. We address topics such as: the status of women and minorities, poverty, forced migration, human rights 
violations, climate change, war, as well as the means of achieving justice, among which-civil disobedience and the reform 
of global institutions. 

POLS 380   Global Governance: International Organizations and Politics                         
      This course examines the ways in which international actors have "established" order in the international system in 
the globalization era. The focus is on the most important global and regional organizations ( the UN, the EU, NATO, etc.) 
and the political processes that made them possible and under which they currently operate. Other forms of governance 
relating to security, trade, environment or international criminal justice ( e.g. the International Criminal Court) are also 
discussed. 

3 credits 

POLS 402   Constitutional Law 

3 credits 

The interpretation and application of the Constitution of the United States. Emphasis on constitutional law. Writing-

in-disciplines class. Prerequisites: POLS 102 or POLS 250 or permission. 

POLS 408  International Law 

3 credits 

The legal rules and principles that guide relationships among nations. Case materials cover international law and the 

International Court of Justice. Prerequisites: POLS 102 or POLS 250 or permission. 

POLS 412  Seminar in History 

3 credits 

This course allows students to synthesize the work they've done in their majors through directed research, evaluation, 
and writing. Students will write a substantive academic paper analyzing a specific research question they will choose early 
in the semester.  Students will read examples of different types of scholarship in their fields including academic abstracts, 
introductions to monographs, and academic journal articles as examples of the types of work they will be writing.  Students 
will have the opportunity to revise and review peer's work to ground their own skills.  Prerequisite: Senior standing. 

POLS 194, POLS 294       Special Topics                                                                   

3 credits 

POLS 295, POLS 395, POLS 495 
Special Topics in Political Science and Legal Studies I, II, III   
        (See Department Requirements for a partial list of Legal Studies and Political Science courses offered as special topics.) 

1-6 credits 

POLS 296, POLS 396, POLS 496   
Independent Study in Political Science I, II, III 

      1-6 credits 

PRAD – PUBLIC RELATIONS AND ADVERTISING 

PRAD 206  Intro to PR/AD  

3 credits 

Students  explore  the  background  and  fundamentals  of  how  organizations  use  persuasive  communication  to  reach 
target audiences. A study of successful case studies and exercises in program writing will build the foundation and basic 
understanding  of  how  advertising  and  public  relations  can  advance  the  mission  and  growth  of  organizations  in  our 
contemporary society.  

PRAD 239  Research for PR/AD 

3 credits 

Course will explore various secondary research techniques using available government and organizational databases, 

359 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
media coverage/analysis, library resources and other tools.  Course will also cover primary research methods, including 
surveys (planning, methods and analysis), observation, experimentation and focus groups.  Students will develop capabilities 
in planning and designing research objectives, tools and evaluation systems, including survey construction, tabulation and 
interpretation, as well as focus group management.  Prerequisite: PRAD 206. 

PRAD 301 PR/AD Design and Management 
       This  course  provides  students  with  planning,  design  and  production techniques  for  creating  and  enhancing  visual 
persuasive communications. Students will use public relations and advertising writing skills, theory in targeting and reaching 
audiences, and knowledge of design programs from previous classes to develop visual print, broadcast and social media ads, 
direct mail pieces, brochures, social media posts and other vehicles. The use of typography, color, graphics and other design 
tools, including Adobe InDesign, Illustrator and Photoshop,  will be used to develop these messages. Upon completion of 
this  class,  each  student  will  have  a  PR/AD  campaign  with  professional-level  designed  pieces  to  add  to  their  portfolio. 
Prerequisite: COMM 120 or GRID 103, PRAD 206 

3 credits 

PRAD 306  Social Media Practices 
      This  course  will  provide  students  with  practical  knowledge  in  the  use  of  social  media  tools  and  building  and 
maintaining an online community. This course will teach students how to create and maintain a professional presence on 
social media, including Facebook, Twitter, Linked In, Youtube, Instagram, etc. Students will learn to use social media to 
enhance and amplify brands and organizations through a host of social strategies and tactics, build their personal brand, 
and  drive  traffic  to  websites.  Students  will  also  participate  in  Hootsuite  University  and  receive  a  certification  for  their 
resume upon graduation from the course at the end of the semester. Dual listed with PRAD 513.  

3 credits 

PRAD 321  PR/AD Writing 
       This  course  will  cover  the  techniques  of  message-based  writing  strategies  used  by  public  relations  and  advertising 
practitioners in various communication functions. The course will involve a variety of intensive public relations writing 
assignments based  on  strategies spanning major functional areas of professional public relations work. This course will 
concentrate on intensive work in the preparation of information for newspapers, radio, television, magazines, brochures, 
newsletters, electronic media, social media and advertisements.. Dual Listed with JOUR 521. Prerequisite: COMM 115 
,PRAD 206 or permission. 

3 credits 

PRAD 326  Integrated Marketing Communication Planning 

3 credits 

This course will explore methods of planning integrated communications programs to meet business/organizational 
strategic objectives.  Students will gain the skills of the advertising (communications) planner by learning about target public 
and market behavior patterns; loyalty rationales of customers, employees and other key stakeholders; message effectiveness 
and other planning areas.  In addition, they will explore various facets of an integrated approach, including, but not limited 
to, advertising, public relations, social media and influencer marketing, content management, digital components ,media 
buying/planning,  sales  promotion  and  direct  marketing.  Students  will  develop  a  consumer-centric  understanding  of 
interpreting and applying research data and strategic objectives to construct creative platforms, inclusive of strategies and 
tactics.  Students  will  work  with  real  clients  to  produce  a  creative  brief,  strategic  communications  plan  and  final  pitch 
presentation. Prerequisites: PRAD 206, 239, 301 and 321  

PRAD 327  Public Relations Issues and Practices 

3 credits 

Students will explore the principals involved in public relations with major emphasis on achieving and understanding 
the issues that public relations professionals face on a regular basis.  Focus will be on the in-depth study of theories learned 
in previous public relations courses at Point Park with emphasis on delving into current issues related to those theories.  
Students are expected to have a basic understanding of key public relations theories and will use class time to expand on 
areas of interest while applying their knowledge to resolving situations requiring public relations expertise.  Prerequisite: 
PRAD 206. 

PRAD 348  Sports Media and Marketing 

3 credits 

This course is a survey of issues pertaining to sports media and the marketing of sports products and entities.  Emphasis 
is given to the application of strategic marketing planning concepts.  The guiding framework for the course is a “5Ps” model 
of sports marketing developed with the aim of creating exceptional customer experiences.  In turn, experiences strengthen 
relationships between a company or organization and its customers.  The course will also substantially review the emerging 
trends, tactics and platforms of sports media and be a weekly forum for examining analyzing “hot button” issues breaking 
in the industry. 

PRAD 416  Special Events Planning 

3 credits 

Students  learn  the  fundamentals  of  special  event  planning  from  a  strategic  and  tactical  viewpoint  and  the  role 

360 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
integrated communication plays in the success of any special event. Emphasis will be placed on researching, developing and 
successfully planning all aspects of a full special event program for a local client.  

PRAD 433  Advertising Competition 

3 credits 

Students prepare an IMC campaign and present it at the National Student Advertising Competition of the American 
Advertising Federation. Campaigns have been for a car, credit card company, airline and a magazine publisher, all of which 
sponsored the annual competition. Students assume job titles and descriptions and produce a comprehensive IMC plan, 
involving  research  and  all  forms of  the Integrated  Marketing  Communications  process,  including  media.  Prerequisites: 
Completion of all School of Communication and PRAD required core courses.  

PRAD 453  Social Media Crisis & Strategic Communications 

3 credits 

The purpose of this course is to examine strategic communication practices throughout the stages of a crisis event. 
Special emphasis is placed on crisis planning, media relationships, image restoration, legal and ethical responses, and the 
use  of  social  media  in  news  reporting,  especially  during  a  crisis.  Students  will  examine  recent  crises  and  the  proper 
management of information flow.  The course will also cover communications impact of crises on employees, communities, 
shareholders, donors and government publics.  Emphasis will be placed on how to effectively handle a social media crisis 
and use social media to report on a crisis.  Students will also learn how to write and implement social media policies, both 
for employees and users. Dual listed with PRAD 522. Prerequisite: PRAD 306 

PRAD 463  Social Media Analytics & SEO 

3 credits 

This course will teach students how to prove return on investment (ROI) to clients by understanding and evaluating 
analytics. In addition, students will learn search engine optimization best practices to further increase a brand’s social media 
ROI. Students will have a deeper understanding of the principles and how to measure and prove the ROI of social media 
and a working knowledge of various industry-standard analytics tools. Students will write social media reports for clients 
based on ROI and analytics results. Dual listed with PRAD 564. Prerequisite: PRAD 306. 

PRAD 473  Social Media Campaigns 

3 credits 

Students will research, write and implement advanced social media concepts including analytics, advertising, activism, 
influencers and budgets.  Social media for journalists will be emphasized.  Students will either work directly with business 
or nonprofit clients to plan and execute a social media campaign or publish an advanced social media journalism project. 
Dual listed with PRAD 573. Prerequisite; PRAD 306. 

PRAD 497   IMC Agency 

3 credits 

Students  will  work  in  a  student-run  agency  model  to  plan,  research  and  construct  integrated  communications 
campaigns for local nonprofit, business or civic organizations utilizing advertising, public relations, direct communications 
and promotions. Students will assume agency job titles and descriptions and will demonstrate mastery of communications 
theory/practice, processes and techniques, and agency management. The course will also serve as a valuable portfolio for 
employment. The major goal of the course is to put to work learned advertising, public relations and marketing principles 
and theories with an emphasis on researching, writing and producing solid integrated marketing communications plans 
and tactics.  Prerequisites: Completion of all School of Communication and PRAD required core courses.  

PRAD 295, 395,495: SPECIAL TOPICS 

1-6 credits 

PRAD 296,396,496: INDEPENDENT STUDY 

                                                                 1-6 credits            

PROD – PRODUCTION 

PROD 100, PROD 101 Tech Practicum I/II 
PROD 100-Fall; PROD 101-Spring 

2 credits 

Freshmen are assigned to crews as an introduction to general production techniques and procedures. Prerequisites: 

PROD 100 is acceptance into the program; PROD 101 is PROD 100. 

PROD 104, PROD 105 Stage Management Practicum I/II 
PROD 104-Fall; PROD 105-Spring 

2 credits 

Freshmen are assigned to crews as an introduction to general production techniques and procedures. Prerequisites: 

PROD 104 is acceptance into the Program; PROD 105 is PROD 104. 

361 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       
 
 
 
 
 
PROD 110  Production Practicum I 

2 credits 

Production Practicum I provides students with foundational, hands-on experience in theater production by assigning 
them  roles  in  Pittsburgh  Playhouse  productions  or  approved  external  productions.  Through  participation  in  run  crew, 
board operation, wardrobe crew, assistant stage management, assistant to designers, or entry-level pre-production technician 
positions, students gain an introduction to essential production techniques, processes, and collaborative work required in 
live performance settings. 

PROD 113  Stage Operations 

2 credits 

An  introduction  to  the  technical aspects  and  operation  of  the  stage.  This includes  types  of  venues,  organizational 
structures, and backstage operations. The focus of skills learned in this class will be how to run a show, rigging, basic trouble 
shooting and repair in the areas of scenery, scenic art, lighting, sound, and wardrobe. Prerequisites: Acceptance into the 
Program. 

PROD 121  Costume Construction I 

2 credits 

This  course  covers  basic  sewing  techniques  (hand  and  machine  sewing)  and  basic  costume  construction  methods. 
Students will learn how to take measurements of a performer and how to use a commercial pattern. A completed garment 
is constructed during the course. 

PROD 124  Fundamentals of Design and Drawing 

3 credits 

Fundamentals  of  Design  and  Drawing  covers  the  underlying  elements  and  principles  to  visual  creation.  The  class 
fosters a multidisciplinary design experience, which ultimately aids the collaboration and communication of theater artists. 
Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Program. 

PROD 132  Stage Management I 

3 credits 

An  introductory  course  in  the  techniques  and  practice  of  stage  management,  including  the  organization  and 
preparation of a production book from beginning rehearsals through the closing of a production. This class will investigate 
the  relationship  between  the  stage  manage  and  the  artistic,  administrative,  and  production  staffs  and  how  to  work 
collaboratively with these staffs. Additional topics include working with the director and actor, stress management, time 
management and performance maintenance. Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Program. 

PROD 140  Theatre Safety 

2 credits 

A study of theatre safety and occupational health. The course covers fire prevention, chemical safety, risk assessment, 

emergency procedures, code requirements, and CPR/First aid. Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Program. 

PROD 142  Drafting and CAD 

3 credits 

An introduction to the proper material, methods, and techniques for communicating settings, properties and working 
drawings  through technical  drafting.  The  course  will  combine  the  skills  of  hand  drafting  and  computer  aided  drafting 
software  to  teach  the  reading  and  creation  of  professional  quality  plates.  Designed  for  beginning  students  in  technical 
theatre. Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Program. 

PROD 145  Script Analysis 

2 credits 

An  introduction  to  dramatic  text  analysis  using  a  variety  of  techniques.  Designed  for  technical,  design  and  stage 
management  majors.  Scripts  will  be  analyzed  and  related  back  to  the  student’s  specific  area  of  study.  Prerequisites: 
Acceptance into the Program. 

PROD 200, PROD 201 Tech Practicum III/IV 
PROD 200-Fall; PROD 201-Spring 

2 credits 

Intermediate  level  production  assignments  for  theatre  production  students  on  work  produced  by  The  Pittsburgh 
Playhouse. Assignments are awarded at the discretion of the Theatre Production Unit. Prerequisites: PROD 200 is PROD 
101; PROD 201 is PROD 200. 

PROD 204, PROD 205 Stage Management Practicum III/IV 
PROD 204-Fall; PROD 205-Spring 

2 credits 

Intermediate  level  production  Assignments  for  the  Stage  Management  Student.  Assignments  are  awarded  at  the 

discretion of the Theatre Production Unit. Prerequisites: PROD 204 is PROD 105; PROD 205 is PROD 204. 

PROD 210  Production Practicum II 

2 credits 

Production Practicum II offers students the opportunity to engage in more advanced production roles, building upon 
the foundational skills gained in Production Practicum I. Students may take on leadership roles such as lead run crew, 

362 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management  or  assistant  management  in  production  shops,  Stage  Manager  or  Assistant,  Designer  or  Assistant,  or 
specialized pre-production technician positions. Assignments are made at the discretion of the Theatre Production Unit 
based  on  student  skills,  ensuring  an  increased  level  of  responsibility,  technical  expertise,  and  leadership  within  a 
collaborative production environment. 

PROD 212  Computer Applications for Managers 

3 credits 

Basic to advanced use of general managerial software that is commonly used in entertainment. Emphasis is given to 

special techniques and efficient use of word processors, spreadsheets, databases, etc. 

PROD 213  Carpentry for the Theatre 

2 credits 

Discussion of common construction methods used in theatre and practical application of techniques in woodworking. 

Prerequisites: Acceptance into the program. 

PROD 221  Costume Construction II 

2 credits 

This course advances the theatrical costume design and production student in the skills of flat patterning and draping 

as well as more complex construction techniques for the creation of costumes. 

PROD 222  Computer Applications for Designers 

3 credits 

Computer Applications for Designers is intended to teach students foundational to advanced skills in 

current design software used to share creative ideas in the entertainment industry. 

PROD 224  Scenic Painting 

2 credits 

A study of basic techniques employed by the scenic artist for the recreation of faux finishes. Emphasis is placed on 
equipment  and  its  maintenance,  procedure  and  practical  application  to  framed  scenery  and  three-dimensional  units. 
Prerequisites: PROD 124. 

PROD 226  Scene Design I 

3 credits 

An introduction to Scene Design that focuses on the storytelling aspects of Design and Scenography. Students will 
understand the function and skill of a scenic designer, learn basic techniques of designing in 3D space, practice conceptual 
development and visual communication skill and undergo the design process with several hand’s on projects. Prerequisites: 
PROD 124. 

PROD 227  Lighting I 

3 credits 

An introduction to Lighting Design that focuses on the storytelling aspects of Light and Scenography. Students will 
understand the function and skill of a lighting designer, learn basic operations of Light, practice concept development and 
visual communication skill. This class is “hands-on” and includes many practical applications and experimentation with 
light. Prerequisites: PROD 124. 

PROD 228  Costume Design I 

3 credits 

An introduction to Costume Design that focuses on the storytelling aspects of Costume Design and Scenography. 
Students will understand the function and skill of a costume designer, learn basic costume design skills and practice concept 
development and visual communication skill. Prerequisites: PROD 124. 

PROD 229  Audio Design I 

2 credits 

An introduction to the art of sound for the theater. Students will be trained in various techniques of sound design, 
including recording, mixing, editing and playback software as well as script analysis and creative listening. Prerequisites: 
Acceptance into the program. 

PROD 243  The Acting/Directing Process 

3 credits 

An introduction to the acting/directing experience that focuses on the communication between technician and artist. 
The class will relate the actor’s and the director’s work to the technical major. Prerequisites: Acceptance into the program. 

PROD 245  Properties I 

2 credits 

An introduction to the procedures, materials and techniques that can be used by the designer or technician in the 

construction of stage properties. Prerequisites: Acceptance into the program. 

PROD 300, PROD 301 Tech Practicum V/VI 
PROD 300-Fall; PROD 301-Spring 

2 credits 

An advanced level production assignment for theatre productions produced by The Pittsburgh Playhouse to further 

363 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the skills learned in PROD 200 and PROD 201. Assignments are awarded at the discretion of the Theatre Production Unit 
and will increase in responsibility from previous assignments. Prerequisites: 200 Level Production Practicum Course. 

PROD 304, PROD 305 Stage Management Practicum V/VI 
PROD 304-Fall; PROD 305-Spring 

2 credits 

Advanced  level  Production  Assignments  for  the  Stage  Management  Student.  Assignments  are  awarded  at  the 

discretion of the Theatre Production Unit. Prerequisites: PROD 304 is PROD 205; PROD 305 is PROD 304. 

PROD 313  Technical Design 

2 credits 

Discussion  and  practical  application  of  techniques  and  methodology  related  to  engineering  a  designers  concept. 
Students will look at design specifications, concepts designs, detail designs, and designs for manufacture based in the reality 
of time, budget and labor. Prerequisites: PROD 113 and PROD 213. 

PROD 321  Costume Construction III 

2 credits 

This advanced level Costume Construction class will introduce the theatrical costume design and production student 
to sophisticated techniques in costume construction, crafts and unconventional costume related applications. Students will 
learn to construct a corset/bodice and explore and experiment with non-traditional and innovative fiber-based materials 
such as nonwovens as well as thermoplastics and costume animatronics. 

PROD 323  Advanced Drawing 

2 credits 

This course will further the student’s methods of drawing with various media and strengthen the passion to express 
ideas visually. Students will learn to more consciously access the creative “right side of their brain” and in turn be able to 
more effectively come up with creative solutions. Prerequisites: PROD 124. 

PROD 324  Advanced Scenic Painting 

2 credits 

A continuation of basic techniques employed by the scenic artist. Emphasis is placed on color mixing cartooning, 

procedure and practical application  to framed scenery, and three-dimensional units. Prerequisites: PROD 124. 

PROD 326  Scene Design II 

3 credits 

An in-depth study of theatrical storytelling and techniques in/through Scenic Design. Students will go through the 
design  process  of  a  theatrical  Scenic  Designer  and  study  in  more  depth  play  analysis,  technique  and  aesthetic 
communication to broaden and enhance the imagination and creation of ideas. Prerequisites: PROD 226. 

PROD 327  Lighting Design II 

3 credits 

An in-depth study of theatrical storytelling and technical operations in/through Lighting Design. Students will go 
through the design process of a theatrical Lighting Designer and study in more depth play analysis, technique, equipment, 
composition and aesthetic psychology effects of stage lighting. Prerequisites: PROD 227. 

PROD 328  Costume Design II 

3 credits 

An in-depth study of theatrical storytelling and techniques in/through Costume Design. Students will go through the 
design  process  of  a  theatrical  Costume  Designer  and  study  in  more  depth  play  analysis,  technique  and  aesthetic 
communication to broaden and enhance the imagination and creation of ideas. Prerequisites: PROD 228. 

PROD 333  Stage Management II 

3 credits 

Continues  the  themes  of  Stage  Management  I.  Particular  attention  is  given  to  calling,  blocking,  and  refining 
characteristics vital to be a leader, team player and skilled communicator. This course includes an introduction to the equity 
handbook and stage managers responsibilities to Actor’s Equity Association. 

PROD 343  Electricity for the Theatre 

2 credits 

Practical application of theories learned in Lighting Design, including building primitive instruments, electrical safety, 

and wiring. Prerequisites: PROD 227. 

PROD 346  Theatre Architecture and Décor  

3 credits 

A survey of the chronological development and historical significance of theatre architecture that begins with ancient 

civilizations and culminates with styles of the twentieth century. Prerequisites: PROD 113 and PROD 124. 

PROD 348  Costume History  

3 credits 

A study of the chronological development of fashion from the classical Greek world to the twentieth century with a 
detailed exploration of the basic clothing shapes, accessories, color, texture and quirks of each period. Prerequisites: PROD 

364 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124 and PROD 228. 

PROD 361  Advanced CAD 

2 credits 

A  continuation  of  PROD  142  that  focuses  on  the  3D  drafting,  renderings,  materials,  lighting,  animations  and 

customizing tools. Prerequisites: PROD 142. 

PROD 362  Metalworking 

2 credits 

General metal working techniques and teachings involving safety, welding (both GMAW and oxyacetylene), cutting, 

bending, and fabricating as it refers to theatre construction. Prerequisites: PROD 213. 

PROD 363  Automation 

2 credits 

The practical applications and theories of the motion of moving scenery, be it moving wagons, turntables, or lifts. 
Beginning with the fundamentals of physics and Newton’s Laws to the practical use of these theories by studying motors, 
winches, turntables, lifts, and other mechanisms for the stage. The course also focuses on the process of mechanical design 
for temporary and permanent stage machinery. Topics include design considerations, component selection, construction 
methods, and safety. Prerequisites: PROD 113, PROD 140, PROD 142, PROD 213 and PROD 313. 

PROD 372  Makeup for Production 

2 credits 

This course introduces the student to makeup design, 3 dimensional makeup, prosthetic makeup, application and 
creation of beards, mustaches and wigs, non-realistic/fantasy makeup, period makeup and way of achieving quick changes 
in makeup. Prerequisites: PROD 124. 
PROD 373  Costume Crafts 

2 credits 

The  course  will  cover  such  elements  as  millinery,  mask  making,  jewelry  assembly,  liquid  latex  armor,  decorative 
embellishments,  constructing  ruffs,  feather  work,  machine  embroidery  and  other  assorted  crafts  as  time  allows. 
Prerequisites: PROD 121. 

PROD 381  Reading Music 

2 credits 

The  course  introduces  the  fundamentals  of  music:  music terminology,  symbols/notation,  and  concepts.  Particular 
emphasis is placed on developing and applying the knowledge and skills most necessary for stage managers to call shows 
from a musical score. Prerequisites: Acceptance into the program. 

PROD 382  Properties II 

2 credits 

An advanced course in Property design and fabrication. This course will investigate unique materials and methods as 

well as pneumatic, hydraulic and basic robotic effects. Prerequisites: PROD 245. 

PROD 383  Stage Movement for Stage Managers 

2 credits 

A study of movement techniques and terminology used by performers on stage. This includes dance terms and fight 

choreography. Prerequisites: PROD 132. 

PROD 391  Audio Engineering 

2 credits 

An introduction to the various equipment and setups used for sound playback and reinforcement needs of live theatre 
productions.  From  this  course  one  will  have  the  knowledge  to  handle  basic  sound  equipment  and  setups  (drama  and 
musical) and troubleshooting techniques. Prerequisites: PROD 229. 

PROD 392  Video Production 

2 credits 

This course is an exploration of video and projected design for the stage. The course will investigate the technical and 
engineering aspects of playback and projections as well as the design considerations within a production. Prerequisites: 
PROD 113, PROD 124 and PROD 227. 

PROD 393  Vectorworks 

2 credits 

An introductory course in the techniques of Vectorworks for use in the theatre and lighting design. Prerequisites: 

PROD 142 and PROD 227. 

PROD 400  Senior Project I 

2 credits 

Each B.F.A. student will be assigned a senior project.  Projects will be assigned at the discretion of the technical theatre 
unit.  These projects may include; Assistant Designer, Assistant Technical Director, Assistant Stage Manager, department 
manager or equivalent for a Pittsburgh Playhouse production or an undergraduate thesis.  Students are required to research 
and critically analyze the project showing the student's mastery of critical thinking.  The student will meet regularly with 
his/her mentor and will be required to interview for SETC/USITT.  Prerequisites: 300 Level Production Practicum. 

365 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROD 401  Senior Project II 

2 credits 

Each B.F.A. student will be assigned a senior project. Projects will be assigned at the discretion of the technical theatre 
unit.  These  projects  may  include;  designer,  technical  director,  stage  manager  or  equivalent  for  a  Pittsburgh  Playhouse 
production or an undergraduate theses. Students are required to research and critically analyze the project showing the 
student’s mastery of critical thinking. The student will meet regularly with his/her mentor and will be required to interview 
for SETC/USITT.  Prerequisites: Senior B.F.A. Production Major or Area Head Permission. 

PROD 413  Technical Direction 

3 credits 

This class puts in focus everything a student has learned for technical theatre and shows the student how to merge all 
the  processes  together.  Participants  will  learn  how  to  supervise  workers,  estimate  and  budget  shows,  create  a  plan  of 
execution for creating a set and keeping records of the production. Prerequisites: PROD 313. 

PROD 426  Scene Design III 

3 credits 

This course looks further into the art of Scenic Design for Musicals, Opera and Found Spaces. Students will realize 
their  ideas  in  physical  and/or  virtual  environments  and  analyze  other  Scenic  Designs  while  further  improving  their 
communication skills with the creative team. Prerequisites: PROD 326. 

PROD 427  Lighting Design III 

3 credits 

This course looks beyond the theatrical application of Lighting Design and prepares the student to design lights for 
television, architecture or the music industry. Students will realize their ideas in physical and virtual environments and 
analyze other lighting designs while further improving their communication skills with the creative team. Prerequisites: 
PROD 327. 

PROD 428  Costume Design III 

3 credits 

This course looks further into the art of costume design. Students will realize their ideas in physical and/or virtual 
environments and analyze other Costume Designs while further improving their communication skills with the creative 
team. Prerequisites: PROD 328. 

PROD 433  AEA & Theatre Unions 

3 credits 

This  class  studies,  discusses,  examines  and  dissects  the  rules  of  production/performance  according  to  the  AEA 

handbook. The class will practice creative problem solving working within the confines of union contract.  

PROD 440  Production Management 

3 credits 

The course is designed to be an overview of the function of Production Management in the performing arts and all its 
facets. Budgeting, scheduling, theatre systems, etc. especially in relationship to working with administrative personnel and 
creative artist. Prerequisites: PROD 132, PROD 113, Two courses of Production Practicums, and Sophomore Standing. 

PROD 450  Professional Preparation for Design/Tech 

3 credits 

In this class the students will study the content and presentation forms of the theatre artist portfolio, resume and cover 
letter. The student will also advance his/her interview skills. Students will journal their professional development efforts 
and  reflect  on  their  progress  weekly.    Cover  letters,  resumes  and  portfolios  (image  and  text)  are  created  and  edited.  
Ultimately,  the  intention  of  this  course  is  to  get  the  student’s  presentation  package  ready  for  future  job  applications. 
Prerequisites: Junior or Senior in the B.F.A. Production Program. 

PROD 451  Professional Preparation for SM 

3 credits 

In this class the students will study the content and presentation forms of the manager portfolio, production binders, 
resume  and  cover  letter.  The  student  will also  advance  his/her  interview  skills.  Students will  journal  their  professional 
development efforts and reflect on their progress weekly.  Cover letters, resumes and portfolios (image and text) are created 
and  edited.    Ultimately,  the  intention  of  this  course  is  to  get  the  student’s  presentation  package  ready  for  future  job 
applications. Prerequisites: Junior or Senior in the B.F.A. Production Program. 

PROD 194, PROD 294        Special Topics 

                                                              3 credits 

PSYC – PSYCHOLOGY 

PSYC 150    Psychological Foundations 

3 credits 

Examines psychological foundations underlying the development of personal, professional, academic, and cultural 
world  views,  and  examines  how  those  world  views  influence  questions  that  human  beings  ask  and  answers  they  find. 

366 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Students will be asked to express their ideas in both oral and written form. 

PSYC 151    Theoretical Foundations to Psychology 

3 credits 

This course surveys and critiques various psychological disciplines and is designed to introduce psychology majors to 
the  historical,  philosophical  and  theoretical  orientation  of  the  department's  psychology  program.   Students  will  read 
original and primary texts from significant authors and be encouraged to formulate their own interests, perspectives and 
critical thinking in psychology. 

PSYC 201    Critical Thinking in Psychology and the Behavioral Sciences 

3 credits 

Students will be introduced to basic information literacy in the social and behavioral sciences.  This course will help 
students to find, critically evaluate, and review literature in psychology and other behavioral and social sciences.  Students 
will  learn  basic  scientific  methodology,  understood  from  various  perspectives  of  psychology,  and  learn  how  to  identify 
whether scientific information is credible, reliable and /or valid.  Students will learn to read original texts of case studies, 
phenomenology,  ethnography,  correlational  research,  experimental  designs,  and  other  approaches  to  investigation.    In 
addition, students will learn to use APA style to complete a critical literature review on a relevant topic on interest in the 
field.   

PSYC 202   Ancient to Modern Approaches to Psychology 

                                    3 credits 

This course is the first in a sequence of two courses focused on the history and systems of psychology and is the pre-
requisite for the second course in the sequence, PSYC 302. The major systems under investigation will include pre-modern 
western and eastern systems of psychology, including aboriginal(e.g. African, Australian, Native American), Asian( e.g. Yoga, 
Taoism,  Buddhism,  Confucianism),  Ancient  Greek  and  Roman,  Scholastic,  Renaissance  Humanism,  Empiricism, 
Rationalism,  Romanticism  and  Decadence  perspectives  on  human  psychology,  as  well  as  the  emergence  of  modern 
laboratory psychology with psychophysics, physiological psychology, structuralism, functionalism, and eugenics. The systems 
will be outlined in relation to their social, cultural and historical context, and will be examined in an interdisciplinary 
fashion., in relation to correlative trends in the arts, humanities and physical sciences, to the extent that they illuminate 
the project of the theories under examination. Each system of human psychology will be critically evaluated through an 
examination of their metaphysical/ontological, epistemological, ethical and aesthetic claims, whether implicit or explicit 
within the theory. This course is designed for majors in psychology, though non-majors and minors may take the course 
with permission.  

PSYC 203    Theories of Personality  

3 credits 

This  course  will  present  the  fundamentals  of  existing  theories  of  personality  with  special  attention  given  to  the 

implications of each. In-depth study of Freud, Jung, Adler and other selected theorists. 

PSYC 204    Abnormal Psychology 

3 credits 

A  study  of  central  issues  surrounding  psychopathology.  Current  American  Psychological  Association  (A.P.A.) 
classification of abnormal behavior patterns and the effects of maladaptive behavior on individuals’ abilities to function in 
their environments.  

PSYC 208    Introduction to Psychoanalytic and Psychodynamic Theories and Approaches 

3 credits 

This course will offer an introduction to the foundational texts of psychoanalytic and psychodynamic theories and 
approaches. Students will learn about development and psychopathology from different psychoanalytic and psychodynamic 
theories,  as  well  as  the  unique  therapeutic  techniques  in  each.  Topics  this  course  will  cover  include  psychosexual 
development, symptom formation, dreams and dream analysis, free association, and transference. We will also discuss what 
psychoanalytic theory might offer cultural analyses and critiques, with topics including racism, sexism, cults, commodity 
fetishism, and political movements, to name a few. Prerequisite: PSYC 150 or PSYC 151. 

PSYC 210    Child and Adolescent Psychology 

3 credits 

This  course  provides  an  in-depth  exploration  of  the  psychological  development  of  children  and  adolescents  from 
infancy through late adolescence. Students will examine key theories of development, including cognitive, emotional, social, 
and physical growth. Emphasis will be placed on understanding the unique challenges and experiences faced by young 
individuals, including family dynamics, peer relationships, and cultural influences. Prerequisite: PSYC 150 or PSYC 151. 

PSYC 213   Social Psychology 

3 credits 

This  course  will  introduce  students  to  the  field  of  social  psychology,  the  study  of  group  influences  on  individual 
through,  emotion  and  behavior.  The  course  will  examine  areas  of  social  psychology  which  include  social  learning  and 
cognition,  social  affect,  the  self,  attitudes,  persuasion,  social  perception,  social  influence,  conformity,  obedience, 
interpersonal  relationships,  altruism,  aggression,  performance,  and  decision-making  in  working  groups,  stereotypes, 

367 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prejudice, discrimination, competition, and cooperation. This course is designed for non-majors and minors in psych who 
seek introduction to social psychology. PSYC 313 Critical Social Psychology is recommended for Psychology Majors. 

PSYC 214    Psychology of Emotion 
        This course is a study of major theories of emotion and their emergence from cognitive, behavioral, physiological, 
social, and evolutionary perspectives in the discipline of psychology. Subject matter will include communication of emotion 
in nonverbal behavior, bodily expressions of emotion, the development of emotion, emotional dynamics in relationships 
and groups, the physiology of emotion, and cultural differences in emotion concepts and expression. 

3 credits 

PSYC 215  Human Capital 

3 credits 

The study of psychological principles used in Human Resource Management.  The course will provide the student 
with a working knowledge of individual and group levels of organizational behavior and how to effectively manage the 
various types and levels of behavior within an organizational setting.  Topics explored in the course include but are not 
limited to; individual and group behavior, organizational culture and structure and processes as they relate to performance 
and  satisfaction  in  organizations.    Topics  under  discussion  at  the  individual  level  will  include;  attitudes,  personalities, 
perception, motivation, diversity and ethics.  Topics under discussion at the group level will include; organizational culture 
and structure, communication, decision making processes, conflict management, change, and stress and group dynamics. 
Prerequisite: PSYC 150. 

PSYC 216    Psychology of Religion and Spirituality                                                              
        A  survey  of  the  psychology  of  religion  and  spirituality,  with  an  examination  of  biological  aspects  of  religious  and 
spiritual experience, developmental theories of religion, the phenomenology of religious and spiritual experience, religious 
virtues and values, and religious coping. 

3 credits 

PSYC 217   Psychology of Evil and Destructiveness                                                       
        An  introduction  to  psychological  theories  of  development  ,  personality,  and  social  psychology  as  they  pertain  to 
descriptions and explanations of malevolent and destructive patterns of behavior. The course will describe contemporary 
research on the assessment and development of destructive personality traits such as antisocial personality, narcissism, and 
Machiavellianism. In addition, the course will survey current social psychological research on destructive behaviors such as 
violence, prejudice, discrimination, and genocide. 

 3 credits 

PSYC 227   Cross-cultural Psychology 

3 credits 

A comparison of the psychology of Western and non-western cultures. Includes an examination of the ways in which 
different child-rearing practices, family structures, educational systems, and world views interrelate to foster quite different 
conceptions of “self”, “other”, “abnormality”, and “gender”.  Prerequisite:  PSYC 203. 

PSYC 230   The Characterological and Psychotic in Fiction and Film 

3 credits 

This course will explore character development, organization and characterological disorder (personality disorders) by 
examining the tension between characterological and situational (episodic) psychopathology, ego development (syntonic 
and dystonic) and defense as portrayed in film and fiction. Using Greek literary themes and dramatism (tragedy, catharsis, 
hamartia,  nemesis),  current  psychoanalytic  theory,  feminist  reappraisals  of  psychopathology  and  social  constructionist 
theory,  the  course  generally  critiques  personality  disorders  (e.g.,  borderline,  narcissistic,  histrionic,  dissociative,  etc.)  by 
closely examining the material of character development such as trauma and abuse (of psychological life) as well as tragedy 
and drama. 

PSYC 231   Interpersonal Relationships 

3 credits 

An in-depth examination of psychological research on interpersonal relationships, with particular attention to the 
effect of relationships on identity formation and self-structure. Includes an examination of the process of interpersonal 
communication.  

PSYC 241   LGBTQ Mental Health 

3 credits 

This interdisciplinary course provides foundational knowledge and general practice skills for lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, and questioning/queer (LGBT) individuals and communities. The course content will include an examination 
of historical and political perspectives, with an emphasis on contemporary mental health concerns and the psychological 
impact  of  stigma  and  discrimination  against  members  of  an  LGBTQ  communities.  Social,  psychological,  cultural, 
behavioral,  environmental,  and  biological  factors  contributing  to  health  and  mental  health  disparities  among  LGBTQ 
individuals and communities will be highlighted. Students will also explore ethical and legal issues and debates through the 
lens of psychology, psychiatry, and social work. Dual listed as SOCW 241. 

368 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PSYC 245    Introduction to Forensic Psychology 

3 credits 

General  introduction  to  the  theoretical  and  clinical  applications  of  the  study  of  forensic  psychology.  Explores  the 
psychological dynamics present in criminal behavior and the role of psychology in prevention and treatment. Also includes 
an examination of the psychological principles involved in jury selection, jury deliberation, and the treatment of witnesses 
and victims.  

PSYC 251    Lifespan Development 

3 credits 

This  course  offers  a  comprehensive  overview  of  human  development  from  conception  through  late  adulthood. 
Students will explore the physical, cognitive, and socioemotional changes that occur at each stage of life, emphasizing the 
interplay between biological, psychological, and social factors. Prerequisite: PSYC 150 or PSYC 151. 

PSYC 253    Psychology of Sexual Behavior 

3 credits 

Students  will  be  introduced  to  various  theories  of  sexual  behavior,  such  as  psychodynamic,  evolutionary,  social 
constructionist, humanistic, and feminist perspectives.  A basic introduction to sexual anatomy—its biology, functions and 
evolutionary history—will be examined.  Students will learn how sexual motives may influence animal and human behavior 
without the explicit awareness of the organism or person.  Students will also identify how evolutionary theory studies and 
predicts behavior based on the concepts of natural and sexual selection.  Social constructionist, humanistic, and feminist 
approaches in the course will identify personal and social factors that influence sexual behavior in ways that may not be 
predicted by looking to biology.  

PSYC 263   Psychology of Parenting 

3 credits 

This course will explore the transition to parenthood and approaches to parenting.  Topics will include attachment, 
childcare options, discipline, and encouraging intellectual and creative growth.  It will also explore how to balance children’s 
needs with personal and professional goals.  

PSYC 266   Art Therapy 

3 credits 

This course is a broad introduction to the field of Art Therapy with a focus on the artistic, historical, and philosophical 
bases of the field. Weekly classes will consist of art making, lecture, and discussion which will be supplemented by weekly 
reading and journaling. Students will explore their artistic and clinical identities in relation to art therapy and broader 
clinical disciplines. 

PSYC 267   Zombies and Psychological Life 
  Why are zombies so compelling? This course examines the zombie as a cultural artifact that can be examined through 
various psychological perspectives. The zombie phenomenon is critically evaluated through the analysis of its manifestations 
in history such as , for example, its beginnings and interrelationship with African magic, Haitian Voudoun ( Voodoo), Afro-
Caribbean  folklore,  spirituality,  mythology/signification,  colonialism,  slavery,  racism,  capitalism,  and  revolution.  The 
zombie complex as a popular culture phenomenon will be explored through film (and other media forms), and in light of 
psychological theories, with an emphasis on postmodern and phenomenological approaches. 

3 credits 

PSYC 302   Modern and Postmodern Approaches to Psychology 

3 credits 

This course follows in a sequence from PSYC 202. The major systems under investigation will include the examination 
of  theories  within  the  broad  spectrum of  modern  and  postmodern  psychologies,  including  natural  science  and  human 
sciences approaches. The systems will be outlined in relation to their social, cultural, and historical context in 20th and 
21st century psychology, and will be examined in an interdisciplinary fashion, in relation to correlative trends in the arts, 
humanities and physical sciences, to the extent that they illuminate the project of the theories under examination. The 
natural  science  psychologies  of  focus  will  include  behavioral  and  cognitive  theories  of  psychology.  The  human  science 
psychologies under study will include classical and contemporary psychoanalysis and psychodynamic approaches, Gestalt 
psychology, humanistic psychology and person-centered theory, phenomenological and hermeneutic psychology, existential 
psychology,  and  post  structural  theory.  Each  system  of  human  psychology  will  be  critically  evaluated  through  an  ex-
amination  of  their  metaphysical/ontological,  epistemological,  ethical,  and  aesthetic  claims,  whether  implicit  or  explicit 
within the theory. The course is designed primarily for majors in psychology. Non-majors and minors in psych may take 
the course only with permission of instructor.  

PSYC 304    Counseling Theories and Practices 

3 credits 

Introduction to affective and cognitive counseling theories. Practical applications and beginning self-exploration.  

PSYC 305    Counseling Practicum 

3 credits 

Designed to develop and sharpen the skills necessary for working with people.  

369 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PSYC 306    Psychopathology: Critical Perspectives 

3 credits 

This  course  will  describe  and  critically  evaluate  various  systems  for  the  diagnosis,  formulation  and  assessment  of 
psychopathology  in  psychiatry  and  clinical  psychology.  The  course  will  provide  an  overview  of  various  conceptions  of 
psychopathology,  mental  illness,  harmful  internal  dysfunction,  deviance  and  social  oppression,  describe  historical 
perspectives  on  psychopathology,  and  examine  quantitative  and  qualitative  research  methods  for  the  study  of 
psychopathology.  The  course  will  also  examine  theoretical  perspectives  on  psychopathology,  including  biological, 
psychoanalytic/psychodynamic, cognitive-behavioral, humanistic, multicultural and social justice, consumer and service-
user,  and  systems  perspectives.  The  course  will also  examine  and evaluate  various  diagnostics  nosology’s,  including  the 
DSM, ICD, Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual (PDM), Research Domain Criteria ( RDoC) , and Hierarchical Taxonomy 
of Psychopathology ( HiTOP). This course is designed primarily for majors in psychology. Non-majors and minors in psych 
may only take this course with permission, though PSYC 204 is recommended instead.  

PSYC 313    Critical Social Psychology 

3 credits 

Social behavior as a function of attitudes, perceptions and motivation; individual and interpersonal cultural factors in 

social behavior, racial relations, group morale and communications. 

PSYC 316   Existential and Phenomenological Psychology 

3 credits 

The origins of existentialism and the phenomenological method. The existential perspective of the implications of 
theory and methodology for a human science. Emphasis on the significance of existential phenomenology for research. 
Dual listed as PHIL 316.  

PSYC 317    Psychology of Adolescence 

 3 credits 

The  physical,  emotional,  social  and  intellectual  development  of  the  adolescent  with  emphasis  on  beliefs,  feelings, 

thoughts and overt behavior.  

PSYC 318    Music and Psychological Life 

 3 credits 

This course will seek to discover and interpret our psycho-social lives within the content of music and lyrics. Each 
work analyzed will feature a different psychological issue and perspective by which the music/lyric will be analyzed. Students 
will learn to apply psychological theory for the interpretation of musical expression. 

PSYC 319    Psychology of Consciousness 

3 credits 

An  in-depth  study  of  the  structure,  capabilities  and  evolution  of  consciousness.  Study  of  recent  research  on 
consciousness of space and time, abnormal and dream states and the construction of “standard” and “alternate” realities.  

PSYC 320   Criminal Psychopathology                                                                                  

3 credits 

An  in-depth  study  of  the  psychology  of  violent  serial  criminal  offenders.  Emphasis  on  the  techniques  of  criminal 
profiling and the usefulness of psychological research and findings for criminal investigations, interviewing of suspects, trial 
strategy, and treatment of offenders, victims, and law enforcement personnel.  

PSYC 321   Happiness, Well-Being and Human Strengths 

3 credits 

Students will be provided with a broad overview of the field of positive psychology, which is concerned primarily with 
human happiness, well-being, and human strengths.  Positive Psychology stands in contrast to general psychology, which 
compares the individual to the average or norm, and it also stands in contrast to abnormal psychology, which has as its 
focus those individuals who suffer as a result of maladaptive behavior.  In contrast, positive psychology is interested in the 
factors that make people not just ordinary, but extraordinary.  Rather than a study of mental illness or mental normality, 
positive psychology is the study of human flourishing.  

PSYC 323   Indigenous Psychology  

                                                                                     3 credits 

Indigenous psychology is the study of human behavior and mental processes as they are understood from within the 
contextual frame of a particular culture, in contrast to approaches to psychology in which concepts are exported from one 
culture to another, different cultural context. This course will examine how theories, concepts, and methods of indigenous 
psychology have been developed, which account for local ecological, historical, philosophical, and religious perspectives of 
the people who are being studied. 

PSYC 325   Horror, Anxiety and the Uncanny 

3 credits 

This class will explore the concepts of horror and anxiety using psychodynamic, existential and psychological theories. 
This class will examine what makes something “horrific” and why there is such fascination around what is disturbing to us. 
Topics covered in this class include the physiological and psychological mechanisms of fear, existential anxiety and dread, 
the abject, and historical, social factors and personality factors that influence what we find to be scary or anxiety provoking. 

370 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
These topics will be elucidated with the use of popular media and literature. 

PSYC 348  Psychology of Diversity 

3 credits 

This course is a seminar for psychology and behavioral sciences students to strengthen their multicultural awareness, 
knowledge, and skills in working with diverse client populations.  The course will help students to understand the role of 
diverse social identities in the development of mental and physical health and well-being.  Students will strengthen their 
understanding of how oppression and discrimination affect individual clients and communities.  This course will also cover 
content related to how culture may affect psychological processes, mental health concerns and help seeking behaviors.  

PSYC 350    Community Psychology 

3 credits  

Students will  be  introduced  to a foundational  understanding  of  community  psychology  and its applications.   The 
course will examine how community factors can influence personal well-being and mental health, and will identify how 
community psychology, as a preventative, strength-based approach to well-being, uses interventions to improve well-being 
in communities.  

PSYC 352    Research Methodology in Human Sciences 

3 credits  

Emphasis  is  on  understanding  the  use  of  methodology,  experimental  controls,  data  analysis  and  scientific 

communication in psychological and sociological research. Dual listed as SOCW 352.  

PSYC 365   Children’s Mental Health 

3 credits 

This course will introduce students to a variety of models of children’s mental health and illness including societal, 
medical, psychoanalytic and humanistic models.  We will explore diagnoses that are common in childhood and adolescence 
such as attentional and learning difficulties, autistic spectrum disorders, depression, anxiety, and eating disorders.  

PSYC 366   Conspiracy Theory 

3 credits 

This course will survey the philosophical, psychological, technological, and historical conditions (and changes) which 
give rise to our current infatuation with, and dire desire to refute, perceived conspiratorial thinking. The class will look at 
shifts in our social world, specific philosophical movements, growing relational and political alienation, the accelerant of 
technology, and a host of other factors which contribute to the supposed crisis of shared truth that we are now experiencing 
nationally and interpersonally. 

PSYC 412    Senior Thesis 

3 credits 

Independent  research  and  study  for  experience  in  sophisticated  methodology  and  interpretation  of  the  results  of 

research. Dual listed as SOCW 412. Writing-in-disciplines class. Prerequisite: Senior Standing. 

PSYC 418    Psychology of Adult Development 

3 credits 

A study of the dynamic continuation of psychological development beyond childhood and adolescence.  

PSYC 455, PSYC 456  Institutional Practicum I, II 

3 credits 

Experience working in a Pittsburgh area institution under professional supervision. Prerequisite: Senior standing. By 

application. 

PSYC 295, PSYC 395, PSYC 495 Special Topics in Psychology I, II, III 

PSYC 296, PSYC 396, PSYC 496  Independent Study in Psychology I, II, III  

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

SAEM – SPORTS, ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT MANAGEMENT 

SAEM 101   Introduction to the SAE Business 

3 credits 

SAEM 101 functions as an introduction to business basics (emphasis on entrepreneurial skills) within the context of 
the  Sports,  Arts  and  Entertainment  industry.    Students  will  receive  an  opportunity  for  experiential  learning  through  a 
SAEM live event assignment and shadowing exercise.   

SAEM 152   Business of Live Entertainment 
      This course will cover many facets of the Sports, Arts and Entertainment business, and students will comprehend how 
live entertainment is a part of all of the disciplines.  Highlights include training in the fundamentals of the entertainment 
business,  which  includes  marketing,  promotion,  advertising,  finance,  theatre  production,  venue  management,  artist 

3 credits 

371 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
management,  artist  touring,  the  recording  industry,  ticketing  operations,  sponsorship  and  more    Prerequisites:    SAEM 
Major, SAEM 101. 

SAEM 201   Event Management 
      This class will examine the foundation of sports, arts, and entertainment event management.  Students will understand 
concept development, site selection, marketing, budgeting, sponsorship and volunteer management for events.  This course 
will address major trends and successful business practices in event management today.  Prerequisites:  SAEM 101. 

3 credits 

SAEM 202   Marketing and Promotion for SAEM 
       Students will be able to apply fundamental marketing and promotional concepts to the sports, arts and entertainment 
industry.    Utilizing  these  theories,  students  will  identify  the  consumer  and  product  markets  and  develop  appropriate 
marketing and promotional plans. Prerequisites: SAEM 101. 

 3 credits 

learn  the  basic 

SAEM 210   Digital Marketing 
      The internet and related technology skills are required by most business today – particularly in the realm of marketing.  
You’ll 
including  advertising,  search  engine 
the  online  marketing  ecosystem 
optimization/management,  analytics,  content  development/deployment  and  social  media.    This  is  a  hybrid  course, 
combining online learning with in-person implementation of learning with real clients during our class time.  Dual Listed 
with BMGT 210. Prerequisites: SAEM 202 or MKTS 205. 

language  of 

3 credits 

SAEM 240   Performing Arts Presenting and Touring 
       This course will examine performing arts presenting and touring operations including for-profit and nonprofit entities 
including:  theatres, dance ensembles, classical music, and opera.  Prerequisites:  SAEM/COPA Major, SAEM 202. 

3 credits 

SAEM 250  Career Prep 
       This class will groom students for entry into the professional world by developing foundational skills in interviewing, 
and  marketing  themselves  utilizing  resumes,  cover  letters,  social  media,  and  e-portfolios.    Prerequisites:    SAEM  Major, 
SAEM 101. 

1 credits 

                                                                                                3 credits 

SAEM 260   Amateur Athletics 
       This course provides an overview of amateur athletics and the ideas of amateurism and professional athletics. Pros and 
cons of both entities will be examined. In addition to introducing administrative concepts that are integral to the successful 
development of a high performing athletic program. Information and positions other than coaching will be presented. 
Students will gain real life experience by speaking with athletic personnel, evaluating contest, and interviewing amateur 
players; as well as, former or modern day professional players. At successful course completion, students will know and 
understand the intricate business operations within an athletic department and professional sports. Students will become 
experts on amateur case studies through research and presentation.   

SAEM 194, SAEM 294    Selected Topics 

1-6 credits 

SAEM 300   Event Management II 
      Students will explore advanced strategies, industry trends, and practical applications to develop a comprehensive skill 
set essential for managing a wide range of events, from corporate conferences to large festivals. Students will be assigned to 
live events throughout the Pittsburgh area including Acrisure Stadium, Stage AE, PNC Park The Benedum Center and 
other event venues to receive hands-on experience. Prerequisite: SAEM 201 

3 credits 

SAEM 301   Facilities and Venue Design 
        This  course  focuses  on  the  principles  and  practices  of  operating  Sports,  Arts  and  Entertainment  venues  and 
recreational  facilities.    Emphasis  is  on  the  management  of  such  facilities,  in  addition  to  security,  staffing,  operations, 
budgeting and other related areas.  This course also focuses on the technical demands and methods for equipping and 
operating sports, arts and entertainment venue.  Prerequisites:  SAEM Major, SAEM 201, SAEM 202. 

3 credits 

SAEM 303   Advertising, Public Relations &Social Media 
        This course explores Sports, Arts and Entertainment both as vehicles for product services of advertising and public 
relations as well as entities that are in constant need of advertising and public relations.  Course covers strategies/tactics 
for promoting via advertising, public relations, and social media.  Course also explores sponsorship, public relations plans, 
crisis public relations and social media.  Prerequisites:  SAEM Major, SAEM 201, SAEM 202. 

3 credits 

372 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAEM 310   Personal Branding & Business Development 
       A business development career path includes opportunities in media supported advertising and sponsorships and live 
entertainment sponsorship, premium seating, ticketing.  In this course you will build your own professional personal brand 
and conduct business with appropriate and expected etiquette.  You’ll learn to prospect, conduct a needs analysis, create 
and deliver a proposal and develop strong client relationships.  Prerequisites:  SAEM Major or Minor, SAEM 202. 

3 credits 

SAEM 320   Ticketing 
      This class will explain to students ticketing in the Sports, Arts and Entertainment industries.  Emphasis will be on 
gaining expertise in various ticketing systems.  Prerequisites:  SAEM Major, SAEM 202. 

3 credits 

SAEM 325   Fundraising from Crowdfunding to Proposal Writing 
        This  course  encompasses  the  fundamental  theories  behind  designing  a  fundraising  plan  for  nonprofit  arts 
organizations, as well as practical experience in writing an annual fund appeal, researching foundations, composing a grant; 
and website and social media analysis.  Techniques for soliciting various sources of contributed income will be discussed, 
including: individuals, corporations, foundations and government entities.  Prerequisites:  Open to all University majors; 
Junior Standing. 

3 credits 

SAEM 330   Talent Booking Management                                                                                 
     This course is designed for students interested in the musical talent management business. The industry will be covered 
from four major perspectives: (1) legal representation, (2) contract negotiations, (3) marketing and public relations support, 
and (4) all other services that managers provide their clients in this ever growing marketplace. The class will be provided 
with  actual  management  projects  throughout  the  semester  with  the  on  campus  coffeehouse,  Point  Perk.    Prerequisite: 
SAEM 152 

3 credits 

SAEM 331   Production Tour Management 
        This course will explore the duties of a live entertainment production manager.  What are the skill sets needed to work 
in this industry?  How do you create a production crew that tours with a band?  What are their responsibilities?  How to 
interact with unions, and develop a tour budget?  Prerequisites:  SAEM 152. 

3 credits 

SAEM 332   Emerging Trends in the Music Industry 
        In this course students will discover the process of how to effectively promote and sell music online.  Students will be 
expected to demonstrate comprehension of the tools that are available to build an artist’s fan base.  Prerequisites:  SAEM 
334. 

3 credits 

SAEM 333   Pioneer Records 
        Students will gain hands-on experience assisting the University's record label, Pioneer Records, in its effort to manage 
and  promote  each  yearly  artist  in  areas  such  as  operations,  studio  recording,  marketing(distribution  to  radio  stations, 
graphic design, public relations, etc.) and booking. Prerequisite: SAEM 152 

3 credits 

SAEM 335   Music Video Workshop 
       This hands-on project-based blended classroom course is designed for students interested in the creative and technical 
aspects of music video production. The course focuses on the entire process, from ideation to final edit, providing students 
with practical skills in conceptualizing, planning, shooting, and editing music videos. Through a combination of theoretical 
discussions, technical training, and hands-on projects, students will gain a comprehensive understanding of the music video 
production process. Student assessment in this workshop will be based on the completion of individual music video projects 
for Pioneer Records talent to be presented at the end of the semester. 

3 credits 

SAEM 336   Music Marketing 
       The Music Marketing course provides a comprehensive exploration of the strategies and trends crucial for success in 
the music industry. Students will gain an in-depth understanding of the unique challenges and opportunities associated 
with  marketing  music,  including  artist  promotion,  music  distribution,  branding,  and  the  impact  of  technology  on  the 
industry.    Student  will  experience  hands-on  marketing  of  a  major  concert  called  Women  Who  Rock.  Prerequisite:         
MKTS 205. 

3 credits 

SAEM 350   Sports, Arts, and Entertainment Management Internship(s) 
        Internships provide students with hands on experience at sports, arts, and entertainment organizations. Students gain 
practical experience, enhance skills learned in the classroom, and acquire contacts with professionals in SAEM. This course 
requires  students  to  complete  150  hours  in  the  field,  be  evaluated  by  their  supervisors  and  prepare  a  report.  For 
SAEM/COPA dual majors who are considering continuing for their MBA, a total of 250 hours is required. Students must 

3-9-credits-each 

373 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be approved prior to beginning their internship and should have a Q.P.A. of 3.0 or higher. Prerequisites: SAEM major 
with approval; SAEM 250. 

SAEM 362   Sports Management and Leadership 
        This course will help students understand the importance of leadership development, strategy and execution.  Students 
will gain practical insights that can be applied to any sports organization that strives to operate on the principles of integrity.  
Prerequisites:  SAEM Major, SAEM 250. 

3 credits 

SAEM 401  Legal Aspects of Sports, Arts & Entertainment 
       Utilizing  case  law,  this  course  will  provide  an  in  depth  discussion  of  the  role  of  the  law  in  the  sports,  art  and 
entertainment  industry.    Students  will  gain  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  the  SAE  industry  through  in-class 
discussions, legal briefings, textbook and trade publications.  Prerequisites:  SAEM Major or Minor, BMGT 201, Junior 
Standing. 

3 credits 

SAEM 420   Producing Commercial and Nonprofit Performing Arts  
       This  course  explores  the  business  of  producing  Broadway,  commercial  theatre  and  dance,  as  well  as  nonprofit 
performing arts.  Students will analyze best practices for producing including programming, raising capital, securing and 
scheduling venues, artistic and working with unions.  Prerequisites:  SAEM Major, SAEM 202, Junior Standing. 

3 credits 

SAEM 460  Sports, Arts and Entertainment Management Internship II 
       Internships provide students with hands on experience at sports, arts, and entertainment organizations. Students gain 
practical experience, enhance skills learned in the classroom, and acquire contacts with professionals in SAEM. This course 
requires  students  to  complete  150  hours  in  the  field,  be  evaluated  by  their  supervisor  and  prepare  a  report.  For 
SAEM/COPA dual majors who are considering continuing for their MBA, a total of 250 house is required. Students must 
be approved prior to beginning their internship and should have a Q.P.A. of 3.0 or higher. Prerequisite: SAEM major with 
approval; SAEM 350. 

 3 credits 

SAEM 461  Sports, Arts and Entertainment Management Internship III 
       Internships provide students with hands on experience at sports, arts, and entertainment organizations. Students gain 
practical experience, enhance skills learned in the classroom, and acquire contacts with professionals in SAEM. This course 
requires  students  to  complete  150  hours  in  the  field,  be  evaluated  by  their  supervisor  and  prepare  a  report.  For 
SAEM/COPA dual majors who are considering continuing for their MBA, a total of 250 house is required. Students must 
be approved prior to beginning their internship and should have a Q.P.A. of 3.0 or higher. Prerequisite: SAEM major with 
approval; SAEM 460. 

 3 credits 

SAEM 480   SAEM Capstone: Business Models of SAE 
       This capstone class requires students to interpret knowledge gained throughout their coursework in the University 
core and SAEM program in order to conceptualize a business model canvas, analyze a company’s business model, and to 
create a business plan for a theoretical sports, arts or entertainment related company.  An e-portfolio will be utilized for 
assessment purposes.  Prerequisites:  SAEM Major, ACCT 220, 90+ Credits. 

3 credits 

SJS – SOCIAL JUSTICE STUDIES 

SJS 101  

Foundations in Social Justice Studies                                                                     

3 credits 

This course introduces students to ideas of social justice. A broad  overview of conceptualizations of social justice, 
including distributive justice (equity), deliberative justice (democracy), and redistributive justice (difference), will intersect 
with  critical  analyses  of  the  major  theoretical  approaches  to  social  justice,  namely,  liberalism,  Marxism,  and  post-
structuralism. Students will then apply their conceptual and theoretical understandings of social justice to a series of case 
studies. 

Introduction to Cultural Anthropology                                                                

SJS 150  
      Anthropology is the pursuit of the understanding of human existence in all its manifold complexity and, therefore, is 
subdivided  into  four  subfields:  Archaeology,  Physical  Anthropology,  Linguistics  and  Cultural  Anthropology.  This  class 
draws on the insight from all four and focuses on the latter, which is concerned with the analysis and understanding of 
contemporary human experience.  

3 credits 

374 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intro to Human Geography 

                                                                                 3 credits 

SJS 175  
      This course introduces students to the fundamental concepts of human geography. The course thus examines the ways 
in  which  social  life  intersects  with,  produces,  and  is  produced  by  various  places,  spaces,  territories,  locations,  borders, 
landscapes, and scales. Students explore a broad range of geographies from across the world, paying considerable attention 
to the ways in which social inequalities work through and are reinforced by different geographic patterns. The course also 
serves to introduce students to some of the key sub-disciplines of human geography, including urban geography, economic 
geography, and political geography.  

SJS 200   Understanding Injustice I                                                                                  
        An  intensive  analysis  of  a  facet  of  understanding  injustice  and  its  re/creation  locally,  nationally,  and/or  globally. 
Topics may vary by semester. 

3 credits 

Articulating Social Justice I                                                                                  

SJS 201  
       An  investigation  of  a  single  means  by  which  individuals  and  groups  express  and/or  enact  social  justice,  locally, 
nationally, and/or globally. Topics may vary by semester. 

3 credits 

SJS 202   Organizing and Advocacy I                                                                                  
          This course will allow students to explore a set of tools used to organize social justice campaigns and advocate for a 
social justice cause. Topics may vary by semester. 

3 credits 

SJS 203   Direct Practice I                                                                                                     
        This course will allow students to explore and apply a set of direct practice tools in the pursuit of social justice. Topics 
may vary by semester. 

3 credits 

Economic Geography                                                                                           3 credits 

SJS 205  
       This class surveys an array of approaches geographers us to study the spatiality of economic activity, from the motions 
of various workers to the locational choices of multinational corporations. It offers a critical analysis of the geography of 
the contemporary economy as it operates in our daily lives and the world beyond us. Focusing on the way that components 
of the economy move-geographically, historically, qualitatively, and quantitatively- from the sphere of production to those 
of exchange, consumption, distribution, reproduction, and back to production, the course uncovers the manner in which 
the economy is inherently geographical. 

The Anthropology of Money                                                                             

SJS 222  
       This course surveys the contemporary and historical uses of money as a human project from basic systems of reciprocity 
to the evolving forms of virtual currency. Drawing on the depth and breadth of anthropological investigation into human 
economic  practices.  This  course  interrogates  the  myriad  forms  that  currency  takes  in  the  current  moment  as  well  as 
exploring the important historical relationship between the advent of money as a human "thought technology “and the rise 
of social complexity, hierarchy and inequality. 

3 credits 

Intro to Grant-Writing                                                                                          

SJS 225  
      This Course will introduce students to the craft of professional grant-writing for fields such as the arts, social justice 
initiate, the  sciences,  education, and  other  non-profit  work. Students  will  learn  how to identify  funding  opportunities, 
calculate a budget of projected expenses, and write key sections of grant proposals. The course will introduce successful 
grant-writing practices at the foundation and corporate levels and provide a general view of government grant practices. 
Prerequisites: ENGL 101 

3 credits 

The South African Anti-Apartheid Movement                                                     

SJS 240  
       This course explores the political geographies of South Africa from the establishment of apartheid in 1948 to the 
present post-apartheid age. Students will examine geographic studies and primary source material to discover the ways in 
which various global processes have woven their way into South Africa’s landscapes over the past seventy years, and in turn, 
how South Africa's political geographies have impacted global markets, politics, and practices. The first half of the course 
will take a detailed look at how the white-minority South African government geographically implemented and maintained 
apartheid according to a colonial logic of racial capitalism. The second half of the course will focus upon ways in which 
South  Africans  ,  Africans  in  neighboring  states,    and  the  broader  international  community  organized  to  resist,  and 
eventually end, apartheid. The course will thus serve as an historical case study of a relatively successful organizing and 
advocacy campaign for social justice. 

3 credits 

SJS 300   Understanding Injustice II                                                                                   
        An  intensive  analysis  of  multiple  facets  of  understanding  injustice  and  its  re/creation  locally,  nationally,  and/or 

3 credits 

375 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
globally. Topics vary by semester. Prerequisite: SJS 150 or SJS 175 and SJS 101. 

Articulating Social Justice II                                                                                  

SJS 301  
         An  investigation  of  several  means  by  which  individuals  and  groups  express  and/or  enact  social  justice,  locally, 
nationally, and/or globally. Topics may vary by semester. Prerequisite: SJS 150 or SJS 175 and SJS 101. 

3 credits 

SJS 302   Organizing and Advocacy II                                                                                
         This advanced course will allow students to explore and apply a set of tools used to organize social justice campaigns 
and advocate for a social justice cause. Topic may vary by semester. Prerequisites :SJS 202 or CENG 250. 

3 credits 

SJS 303   Direct Practice II                                                                                              
      This advanced course will allow students to explore and apply a set of direct practice tools in the pursuit of social justice. 
Topics may vary by semester. 

3 credits 

SJS 325   Global Political Economy                                                                                  
      This course will survey and investigate the sociocultural dimensions of global political economy, as a comprehensive 
and systematic approach to understanding of the roots of many of the world's dynamics of inequality. In the process we will 
interrogate the , analytically distinct but practically intertwined , historical processes associated with the Enlightenment, 
(European) colonialism, and capitalism, as well as their profound and lasting repercussions on the contemporary world. 
Prerequisite: SJS 150 or SJS 175 

3 credits 

Advanced Social Theory                                                                                    

SJS 350  
        The readings and discussion in this course will survey the history of the Western tradition of social theory. Special 
focus will be on the 20th century schools of thought, e.g. Existentialism, Neo/Marxism, Structuralism, Post-Structuralism, 
etc. Prerequisite: SJS 101, SJS 150, or SJS 175. 

3 credits 

SJS 370   Global Social Justice                                                                                          
        This course introduces students to the emergent field of global social justice. A broad overview of conceptualizations 
of social justice, political, legal, educational, and economic systems, will be analyzed, including notions of equity, theoretical 
approaches to social justice, liberalism, neoliberalism, and post-structuralism around the world. An understanding of such 
concepts and systems requires a sound foundation of ethical values with which students will explore, the application of the 
theory to practice. Student's will then apply their conceptual and theoretical understandings of social justice to a series of 
case studies, and develop models that are innovative. Prerequisite: SJS 101, SJS 150, or SJS 175. 

3 credits 

Social Justice and Community Research                                                           

SJS 400  
       Community based participatory research (CBPR) is a research approach that has a strong commitment to social justice. 
It unites communities and researchers in the collective goal of addressing community-identified needs through a process of 
sharing power, nurturing co-learning, augmenting assets and ultimately strengthening community capacity. This course will 
cover theories, principles and strategies of CBPR. It also addresses CBPR's advantages and limitations, the ethics of CBPR, 
and the necessary skills for taking part in CBPR projects. Prerequisite: SJS 101 

3 credits 

Social Justice Senior Thesis Capstone                                                            

SJS 405  
       The capstone course for the Social Justice Studies major will allow students to conduct original research and write a 
thesis on a relevant social justice topic. The research will draw from the work the students completed in their SJS 400 Social 
Justice and Community Research course. The thesis may also be rooted in the student’s practicum experience (SJS 401). 
Under the guidance of a faculty supervisor, students will collect and analyze data, and write an 8,500-9,500-word thesis in 
the format of a peer-reviewed journal article. Upon completion of at least a full draft of the thesis, the students will orally 
present their research in a public forum(e.g., student symposium or other classroom or conference setting). Prerequisites: 
SJS 101 and SJS 400 

3 credits 

SOC – SOCIOLOGY 

SOC 111   World Cultures 

3 credits 

The  course  serves  as  an  introduction  to  studying  cultural  changes  form  an  interdisciplinary,  global  perspective. 
Students  will  consider  diverse  ways  of  being,  finding  meaning,  and  assigning  value  that  exist  in  human  communities. 
Common processes and themes of cultural change around the world will be explored. 

376 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SOC 150    Sociological Foundations 

3 credits 

This course introduces students to the main concepts, theories, and methods of the discipline of sociology. Subject 
matter will include the relationship between the individual and social groups, social institutions, culture, and the social 
environment. Students will consider how the intersection of social identity, categories (race, ethnicity, class/socioeconomic 
status,  gender,  sexuality,  religion,  and  ability  status)  may  impact  individual  development,  with  an  emphasis  on  power, 
privilege, and access to resources in society. Content related to human diversity and social inequality will be a substantial 
element of this course 

SOC 175     Introduction to Global Cultural Studies    

3 credits 

An  introduction  to  the  critical  analysis  of  contemporary  global  cultural  circumstances  with  special  emphasis  on 
developing an appreciation of the complex character of human cultural patterns the world over as well as a global perspective 
on the dynamics of power and privilege. Dual-listed with GCS 175. 

SOC 203 

Spaceship Earth: Introduction to Environmental Studies 

3 credits 

Global warming, the latest deadly virus rapidly spreading around the world, plastic islands in the middle of the world's 
oceans, massive extinctions of plant and animal species-ecological collapse appears to be in our midst. In this introduction 
to  environmental  studies,  students  explore  social  scientific  approaches  to  studying  not  only  on  nature  but  also  society. 
Multiple and conflicting perspectives on the relationship between nature and society are studied through case studies and 
experimental activities. 

SOC 205    Social Inequality in America 

3 credits 

An  examination  of  prestige  categories,  economic  stratification,  power  structures,  social  mobility  and  social  class. 

Conflicts deriving from these social conditions are studied. Prerequisite: SOC 150. 

SOC/MLNG 260  Japanese Culture 

3 credits 

A study of the culture of Japan with special emphasis on the historical development and underlying dynamics of the 
Japanese  world  view.  Education, child-rearing,  business  practices,  morality,  relationships,  language,  and  the  arts  will  be 
explained. 

SOC/HIST 263  World History: Central and South America  

3 credits 

The  development  of  the  political,  economic,  social  and  cultural history  of  Latin  America  since  the revolution  for 

independence. Prerequisites: HIST 203, HIST 204; or permission. 

SOC 301    Theories of Sociology 

3 credits 

This course is a seminar to develop an understanding of, and skills in, sociological theory. In this course students will 
examine theories that address the greatest social problems of our times( and the times in which the theories emerged). 
These theories include contemporary theories-for example, on the question of the relationship between nature and society-
as well as classical theories of Karl Marx, Max Weber, and Emile Durkheim. 

SOC 308    American Ethnic Groups 

3 credits 

A study of the cultural values of selected American ethnic groups and their interaction with the dominant American 

society. Prerequisite: SOC 150. 

SOC 315 Modern World Systems 

3 credits 

A study of the ongoing dynamics of the Modern era (15th Century to present) that have fostered the emergence of the 
current world system; particular attention will be paid to the contemporary character of our “globalizing” world, including 
such aspects as the increasing global division of labor, neoliberalization, corporatization, etc.   

SOC 335     Revolutions 

3 credits 

This course focuses on “revolutions” as globalizing forces in human history; it begins with a discussion of the European 
Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolutions and proceeds through the American and French revolutions to the Bolshevik 
Revolution  incorporating  ancillary  “revolutions”  along  the  way,  including  discussions  of  some  or  all  of  the  following: 
European  colonial  expansion,  the  Bolivarian 
liberation,  Fordist  production,  consumerism,  Viet  Nam,  post 
industrialization/post-Fordism, postmodernity, neoliberalism, etc.  Prerequisite:  GCS 175. 

SOC 356   Global Social Change 
       Society is consistently changing, in planned and unplanned ways. This seminar course is devoted to the intensive study 
of  a  social  change  topic(  such  as  agriculture  and  food  systems,  sustainable  development).  Using  the  tools  of  sociology, 
students will develop an understanding of a large scale social change topic globally. Student learning will culminate in a 

3 credits 

377 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
research proposal and/or paper. Topics may vary by semester. 

SOC 415   Women:  Historical and Global Perspective 
  What roles and functions do women have in the global arena? Although not a minority, women are still, for the most 
part, disempowered. The course will explore the position of women - globally - from historical, socio-political, psychological, 
literary, as well as economic perspectives. Understanding issues such as misogyny and family values will be analyzed in the 
context of the specific institutions that promote such trends.  Dual listed as ENGL 415. 

3 credits 

SOC 497, SOC 498 Honors Seminar in Human Sciences I, II 

3 credits 

Various topics, pursued in depth, chosen at the discretion of the department. Dual listed as PSYC 497, PSYC 498. 

Prerequisite: Permission. 

SOC  194, SOC  294       Special Topics                                                                   

SOC 295, SOC 395, SOC 495  Special Topics in Sociology I, II, III  

SOC 296, SOC 396, SOC 496 Independent Study in  Sociology I, II, III 

3 credits 

 1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

SOCW – SOCIAL WORK 

SOCW 105  Marriage and the Family 

3 credits 

Sociological perspectives on premarital, marital and familial relationships including mate selection, sexuality and sex 

roles, legal and economic aspects of marriage, growth and conflict, parenthood and marital dissolution. 

SOCW 202  Social Issues  

3 credits 

An in-depth discussion of selected issues that have a fundamental impact on the social world. Emphasis on the analysis 

of social problems and the development of possible approaches to them.  

SOCW 221  Introduction to Social Work 

A general introduction to the goals, problems, practices and procedures of social work.  

SOCW 241  LGBTQ Mental Health 

3 credits 

3 credits 

This interdisciplinary course provides foundational knowledge and general practice skills for lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, and questioning/queer (LGBT) individuals and communities. The course content will include an examination 
of historical and political perspectives, with an emphasis on contemporary mental health concerns and the psychological 
impact  of  stigma  and  discrimination  against  members  of  an  LGBTQ  communities.  Social,  psychological,  cultural, 
behavioral,  environmental,  and  biological  factors  contributing  to  health  and  mental  health  disparities  among  LGBTQ 
individuals and communities will be highlighted. Students will also explore ethical and legal issues and debates through the 
lens of psychology, psychiatry, and social work. Dual listed as PSYC 241. 

SOCW 309  Sociology of the African-American Experience 

3 credits 

An exploration of the history of people of African descent in America. Considers African-American relationships with 

social institutions and their effects relative to child development, education, politics, economics and family structure.  

SOCW 326  Social Welfare Policy 

3 credits 

A study of local, state and federal social service and mental health organizations and agencies. Emphasis on services 

provided, referral procedures and inter-relationships of various agencies.  

SOCW 350  Sex, Gender, and Identity Politics 

3 credits 

This survey course is designed for psychology and behavioral sciences major to understand human sexuality, gender, 
and gender identities, and the role these play in social interaction and public policy. The course will begin with an analysis 
of current intersectional movements and the social systems and policies they push against. Next, the class will analyze the 
social construction of the human body and its reproductive capacity. Working through history, the course will then theorize 
a  trajectory  of  sexuality  and  gender  identity  in  America  today.  Students  will  strengthen  their  understanding  of  how 
oppression, discrimination and violence follow particular issues of sexuality and gender.  

378 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SOCW 352  Research Methodology 

3 credits 

Emphasis is on understanding the use of methodology, experimental controls, data analysis and scientific communica-

tion in psychological and sociological research. Dual listed as PSYC 352.  

SOCW 412  Senior Thesis 

3 credits 

Independent  research  and  study  for  experience  in  sophisticated  methodology  and  interpretation  of  the  results  of 

research. Dual listed as PSYC 412. Writing-in-disciplines class. Prerequisite: Senior Standing. 

SOCW 194, SOCW 294       Special Topics                                                           

SOCW 295, SOCW 395  Special Topics in Social Work I, II 

 3 credits 

 1-6 credits 

SPAN – SPANISH 

SPAN 101   Elementary Spanish I 

3 credits 

An introduction to the Spanish language and Hispanic culture through conversation and basic grammar. 

SPAN 102   Elementary Spanish II 

A continuation of SPAN 101. Prerequisite: SPAN 101. 

SPAN 201   Intermediate Spanish I/Translation 

Reading and translation of various modern Spanish texts. Prerequisite: SPAN 102. 

SPAN 202   Intermediate Spanish II/Conversation 

Development of conversational fluency and practical composition. Prerequisite: SPAN 102. 

SPAN 216   Spanish Culture 

3 credits 

3 credits 

3 credits 

3 credits 

An introduction to Spanish culture and history from the medieval era to the present. Selected historical and literary 
texts are used to give a panoramic view of Spanish culture. Presented in English. Prerequisite: History 150 or permission of 
the instructor. Dual listed as HIST 216. 

SPAN 303   Spanish-American Literature 

3 credits 

A survey of Spanish-American literature from its origins to the present. Prerequisite: SPAN 201 or permission. 

SPAN 194, SPAN 294       Special Topics                                                                   

SPAN 295, SPAN 395, SPAN 495   
Special Topics in Spanish I, II, III 

SPAN 296, SPAN 396, SPAN 496  
Independent Study in Spanish I, II, III 

3 credits 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits   

SPED – SPECIAL EDUCATION 

SPED 180   Special Education and Inclusive Practices 

3 credits 

This introductory course will provide the student with an overview of the field of special education with emphasis on 
the evolution of special education and the legal basis for the current types of programs and services delivered to students 
with disabilities.  Students will learn about the various categories of disabilities and the impact of these on the educational 
programs of special needs students.  Students will examine instructional and behavioral strategies that promote positive 
learning experiences for students with disabilities.  Observations of students with disabilities in a variety of educational 
settings and service delivery models will be required.  Interaction will take place with special education professionals who 
are  currently  working  with  and  delivering  services  to  students  with  disabilities  in  various  school  settings.  Prerequisite:  
Current clearances as required by PDE. 

379 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SPED 220   Instructional/Assistive Technology and Universal Design 

 3 credits 

This introduction to Assistive and Instructional Technologies will explore the use of a wide range of technology tools 
that can be utilized to meet the academic and communicative needs of students with special needs and abilities.  Students 
will discuss the legislative, education, and ethical foundations upon which assistive technology integration are grounded.  
Students  will  utilize  the  SETT  framework  and  feature-match  principles  to  identify,  apply,  and  assess  instructional  and 
assistive technology tools for use by individual students as well as larger learner groups.   

SPED 280  Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports 

3 credits 

Information and practical training in the implementation of basic classroom management theories and strategies for 
all students, especially those with learning disabilities will be the focus of this course.  Students will learn about mandates 
and current legislation affecting the management of all student behavior in schools. The Positive Behavioral Interventions 
and Support model will be studied in depth.  Data- based and data-driven decision making will be emphasized. Students 
will also learn and practice strategies for addressing and improving school survival skills, social skills, and specific student 
behavior problems. Students will understand, develop and practice culturally responsive behavior strategies that promote 
effective communication and collaboration with students with disabilities and their families. Pre-requisite:  SPED 180. 

SPED 281  High Incidence Disabilities 

 3 credits 

This course will provide an overview of how to teach students with high incidence disabilities.  Included in this course 
will be a review of students who are identified as having a learning disability, a mild intellectual disability or an emotional 
disturbance.  The definition causes, and characteristics of each disability will be presented in order  for the students to 
develop a thorough understanding of each disability category.  In addition, the programs and services that are available for 
students with high incidence disabilities and the accommodations that may be necessary in order for them to learn.  The 
importance of building family partnerships and understanding the impact this can have on a student’s progress will be 
discussed.  Consideration will be given to the role that collaboration and communication plays in the Individual Education 
Program (IEP) plan and the ability to successfully program for students with high incidence disability.  Pre-requisite:  SPED 
180. 

SPED 282  Evidence Based Effective Instruction: Low Incidence Disabilities 

3 credits 

This course will provide an introduction to children with physical, multiple, health and sensory disabilities and their 
educational  implications.    The  material  will  emphasize  the  importance  of  school  personnel  needing  to  understand  the 
student’s disability in order to meet his or her unique needs and to provide an appropriate education.  The students will 
also learn the importance of a team in order to support a student with complex disabilities as they progress through the 
educational system.  Students with physical, health and multiple disabilities have needs that require many difference types 
of professional expertise in order to receive an appropriate education.  The students will examine the importance of teach 
approaches as they relate to the education of these students.  Some of the disabilities covered in this course are: cerebral 
palsy,  traumatic  brain  injury  and  spinal  cord  injury,  spinal  cord  injury,  spina  bifida,  osteogenesis  imperfect,  juvenile 
rheumatoid arthritis, vision loss, hearing loss, muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis.  Treatments for the conditions will also 
be covered.  It is important for educators to understand the different conditions and the treatments so that they are better 
able to work with other specialists involved with their students.  The course will also introduce students to the role that 
families play in the education of their child.  The students will also have opportunities to observe students in classrooms 
and in other therapeutic settings on site and through DVDs.  Finally, students will interact with professionals who are 
currently working with children in schools and therapeutic settings.  Prerequisite:  SPED 180. 

SPED 194, SPED 294       Special Topics                                                                 

SPED 380  Differentiated Instructional Practices in the Inclusive Classroom 

  3 credits 

3 credits 

This course will provide information on how educators can differentiate instruction to meet the needs of their students 
with disabilities in the regular classroom setting.  Included in this course will be a review of the components of differentiated 
instruction and how these components can be implemented in a regular education setting.  Students will learn how to 
assess  the  learning  styles  and  needs  of  their  students  as  they  acquire  skills  to  manage  a  classroom  where  a  variety  of 
instructional strategies are used.  Data-based and data-driven decision making as it relates to the teaching of academics will 
be included.  While observing lessons in specific content areas, students will analyze instructional practices observed and 
determine which will be most effective for students with disabilities.  Students will be required to demonstrate the strategies 
presented  in  class  and  apply  these  strategies  in  demonstration  lessons  in  their  areas  of  potential  teacher  certification.  
Prerequisite:  Successful completion of six credits of SPED coursework. 

SPED 381   Secondary Transition Processes and Procedures 

3 credits 

This course will provide an introduction to children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).  The material will include 
current research on causes, characteristics, assessments and treatment of this disorder.  The students will receive an overview 

380 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the information necessary for a teacher to be adequately informed if they have a student in their class with ASD.  The 
students will also learn the importance of collaborating with other team members in order to support a student with ASD 
as  they  progress  through  the  educational  system.    Areas  covered  include  assessment,  evidence  based  practices,  applied 
behavioral analysis, and the importance of social skills and communication learning.  Students will be introduced to the 
role that families play in the advocacy for their child from their input at an IEP meeting to developing support groups for 
other families.  The students will also have opportunities to observe students with ASD in the classroom and in other 
therapeutic settings on site and through DVDs.  Finally, students will interact with professionals who are currently working 
with children with ASD in school and in therapeutic/community settings. 
Prerequisite:  Successful completion of six credits of SPED coursework. 

SPED 382   Autism Spectrum Disorders 
       This course will provide an introduction to children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD).  The material will include 
current research on causes, characteristic, assessment and treatment of this disorder.  The students will receive an overview 
of the information necessary for a teacher to be adequately informed if they have a student in their class with ASD.  The 
students will also learn the importance of collaborating with other team members in order to support a student with ASD 
as  they  progress  through  the  educational  system.    Areas  covered  include  assessment,  evidence-based  practices,  applied 
behavioral  analysis,  and  the  importance  of  social  skills  and  communication  learning.  The  students  will  also  have  the 
opportunities to observe students with ASD in the classrooms and in other therapeutic settings on site and through DVDs.  
Finally, as a part of the student depth case study of one student diagnosed on the autism spectrum focusing on the effective 
instructional  practices,  behavioral  and  communication  supports,  and  assistive  technology  as  identified  in  the  child's 
individualized Education Program (IEP) plan. 

3 credits 

SPED 432   Student Teaching Seminar 

3 credits 

Senior seminar course for all education majors accomplishing their student teaching practicum.  Students compile a 
professional portfolio that reflects the diverse strategies, methodologies, practices, and realities of teaching in their host 
schools. Current educational issues and problems discussed and documented. Reflective journal maintained noting how 
best to translate skills, knowledge, and educational theory into successful practice in the school setting. Co-requisite: School 
Teaching Practicum and school site internship. 

SPED 434   Student Teaching I 
         Each student will be placed in an appropriate certification site to complete 160 hours of student teaching. Students 
will reflect on the diverse strategies, methodologies, practice, and realities of teaching in their host schools. Students are 
required to demonstrate competency across planning, classroom environment, instruction, and professionalism. 

3 credits 

SPED 435   Student Teaching II 
        Each student will be placed in an appropriate certification site to complete 260 hours of student teaching. Students 
will reflect on the diverse strategies, methodologies, practices, and realities of teaching in their host schools. Students are 
required to demonstrate competency across planning, classroom environment, instruction, and professionalism. 

3 credits 

SPED 481   Intensive Reading, Writing, and Math Interventions 

 3 credits 

This course provides a brief introduction to data collection and effective practices.  These assessments help special 
education teacher candidates understand students in different ways and focus their instruction on effective practices that 
can be measured and monitored.  More in-depth attention will be given to Progress Monitoring/Formative Assessments.  
Progress monitoring data is crucial to the efficient and effective use of classroom time.  Teacher candidates will learn to use 
ongoing progress monitoring assessment s to see if their instruction is having the desired effect and make instructional 
adjustments as needed.  Students will learn to monitor progress through group tests, running records, anecdotal notes, or 
other observation formats.  Students will examine and apply how to use data collection at the primary, secondary, and 
tertiary levels and connect these effective practices, assess these practices and make modifications in order to monitor and 
assess for best results. Prerequisite:  Successful completion of six credits of SPED coursework. 

SPOR – SPORTS MANAGEMENT 

SPOR 266   Sports Administration and Coaching 
     The Sports Administration & Coaching course explores the ethical, legal and professional challenges that occur in 
athletic administration and coaching. The course provides a comprehensive understanding of the principles and practices 
involved in managing sports organizations and coaching athletes. This program blends theoretical knowledge with practical 
skills to prepare students for leadership roles in the sports industry. Students will gain insights into sports management, 

3 credits 

381 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
marketing, finance, ethics, and effective coaching techniques. Prerequisite: SAEM 101. 

SPOR 360   Sports Agents 

3 credits 

This course is designed for students interested in the sports agent management business.  The industry will be 

covered from four major perspectives:  (1) Legal Representation, (2) contract negotiations, (3) marketing & public 
relations support, (4) all other services that agents provide their clients in this ever-growing marketplace.  Prerequisites:  
SAEM Major, SAEM 250. 

SPOR 366   Sports Sales 
        Sales are the lifeblood of a sports organization. This course focuses on the fundamentals of the sports ticket sales 
process and the sports sponsorship sales process. The course covers a range of topics from identifying the sales process to 
how  to  develop  an  effective  sports  sponsorship  package.  In  addition,  students  will  get  hands-on  experience  selling 
professional sports tickets (Pittsburgh Pirates, Pittsburgh Penguins, Cleveland Cavaliers, etc.). Sports industry best practices 
and successful sales strategies will prepare students for a career in sports sales. Prerequisites: SAEM 310. 

3 credits 

SPOR 367   Sports Marketing 
        Sports Marketing provides an in-depth exploration of the dynamic and evolving field of sports marketing, emphasizing 
strategies and tactics essential for success in the sports industry. Students will develop a comprehensive understanding of 
the  unique  challenges  and  opportunities  assocmkiated  with  marketing  sports  entities,  including  Pittsburgh-based 
professional teams, collegiate athletics, and sporting events. Prerequisite: MKTS 205. 

3 credits 

SPOR 390   Emerging Trends in Sports 
     This course explores the dynamic landscape of the sports industry, focusing on the latest trends that are shaping the 
future of sports. Students will explore various aspects of the sports world locally, nationally, and globally, including 
technological innovation, traditional and evolving revenue streams, the importance of diversity and inclusion in sports, 
and the positive impact of sports on a community. Prerequisite: SPOR 367. 

3 credits 

SPTS – SPORTS COMMUNICATION 

SPTS 202   Introduction to Sports Communication 
       Introduces  students  to  the  business  and  professional  sides  of  sports  communication  industries.  It  examines  the 
historical  development  of  the  business  and  the  current  industrial  policies  and  practices  around  content  creation  and 
distribution. Introduction to Sports Communication addresses the vital role that social media and web presence play in 
the industry. Also, it begins the students' personal brand development, a process which will continue throughout their 
major courses. 

3 credits 

SPTS 300    Sports Broadcasting 

3 credits 

Students  in  the  Sports  Broadcasting  course  will  work  with  Point  Park  University  Athletics  to  create  a  regularly 
scheduled  sports  show  consisting  of  highlights  and  weekly  features  on  athletes,  facilities,  coaches,  and  personnel.  The 
content from this show may be repurposed for use in newscasts and/or U-View programs. Prereqs: COMM 215 

SPTS 305  Sports Public Relations and Advertising 
        Students will learn basic skills in sports public relations and advertising, as well as specialized scenarios for strategic 
communication for sports teams and athletes, including both event based and continuous communication. The course will 
address the broad and diverse aspects of addressing all target publics within the sports industry through case studies and 
discussion of the theoretical underpinnings of major strategic communication strategies. Prereq: SAEM 303 or PRAD 206 

3 credits 

SPTS 320  Sports Podcasting 
       Students  in  the  Sports  Podcasting  course  will  learn  the  fundamentals  of  podcasting  broadly,  as  well  as  specialized 
scenarios for sports podcasting. The course will address the variety of approaches to covering sports by podcast. Students 
will  be  acquainted  with  technologies  for  podcasting,  from  consumer-grade  to  professional  level.  Finally,  students  will 
develop their own storytelling skills in the creation of a multi-episode sports podcast. 

3 credits 

   Sports Photography and Video 

SPTS 325  
       Students in Sports Photography and Video course will learn fundamental and advanced techniques in creating single 
camera  sports  video  and  photographs.  Key  concepts  in  photojournalism  are  combined  with  the  unique  challenges  of 
covering sports to enable students to effectively shoot and edit sports photo and video. Students will be acquainted with 
technologies for acquiring video and photos, from consumer-grade to professional level. Students will leave the course with 

                                                                             3 credits 

382 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a multimedia portfolio of their work. Prereq: PHOT 205, BPMM 215 or COMM 215 

SPTS 295, 395,495: SPECIAL TOPICS 

1-6 credits 

TE – TECHNICAL ENGINEERING 

Introduction to Theatrical Engineering 

TE 101  
      Introduction to the practice of engineering in entertainment and performance settings. Survey of common software 
used in the profession with an emphasis on programming and computation. Consideration of artistic, legal, and ethical 
issues and discussion of career opportunities. Practice in oral and written communication of technical material. Classroom 
study will be enhanced by guest speakers and field trips 

3 credits 

Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering I 

TE 401  
     Consideration of legal, ethical, social, and economic factors in engineering practice. Use of effective oral and written 
communication  techniques  in  the  workplace.  Application  of  project  management  tools  including  proposals,  progress 
reports, and design reviews. Students, working in teams, propose engineering design projects to meet current needs in the 
entertainment  and  performance  industry.  By  the  of  the  term,  each  team's  proposal  must  be  accepted  by  the  project 
supervisor. Prerequisites: PROD 226, PROD 227, PROD 229, 12 credits of engineering major courses at the 300, 400 
level. 

3 credits 

TE 402  

Professional Practice in Theatrical Engineering II 
Continuation of TE 401. Student teams complete the projects proposed in TE 401 in a collaborative, 

3 credits 

professional atmosphere using management tools such as engineering notebooks, progress reports, and design reviews. By 
the end of the term, each team must document and deliver the product described in its proposal. Prerequisites: TE 401 

    THEA – THEATRE ARTS 

All sequential courses must have a passing grade and be taken in order. An “F” grade in THEA 101 or THEA 104, etc. 
would keep a student from taking the second half (THEA 102 or THEA 105). A minimum “C” grade average is required 
to advance to the next level. This applies to all technique classes (Movement, Voice & Speech, Acting, Singing, and Musical 
Theatre). 

THEA 101, THEA 102  Acting I , II 

2 credits 

A yearlong immersion basic techniques of the Stanislavski System through text analysis, exercises and scene work. 

Open to theatre performance majors only. Prerequisite for THEA 102 is THEA 101.  

THEA 104, THEA 105  Voice and Speech I , II 

 2 credits 

A yearlong immersion in the fundamental foundation of voice training for the actor, physical awareness, breath, and 
the free release of sound. Resonance, range, articulations, vocal clarity and expressiveness are also emphasized. Open to 
performance majors only. Prerequisite THEA 105 is THEA 104.  

THEA 109   Elements of Stagecraft I 

2 credits 

Technical problems of stage production such as scene construction and painting, stage lighting and equipment and 
costume construction in laboratory and actual productions. Dual listed as DANC 109. Prerequisite: Audition or Interview 
and acceptance into the program.. 

THEA 111, THEA 112  Introduction to Acting I, II 
THEA 111-Fall THEA 112-Spring 

 3 credits 

An introduction to the acting process through exercises scene work and monologue work, improvisation, lecture, play 

analysis and attendance at live performances. Open to all University majors. Recommended for Dance majors 

THEA 114, THEA 115 Stage Movement I, II                                                                       
       A yearlong course with an introduction to body awareness through various techniques in order to free habitual habits 
of tensions and increase range and freedom of expression for the actor. For Acting and Performance & Practices majors 
only. 

2 credits 

383 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THEA 116  Principles of Singing I 
      An introduction to the basics of singing (i.e. breath, resonance, support, articulation, registration and interpretation) 
This course will focus on achievement and application of the beginning principles of healthy vocal technique. Prerequisites 
:Dance Major with a Jazz Concentration/BFA Acting or elective with permission. 

1 credit 

THEA 117  Principles of Singing II 
        This course will focus on the application of healthy vocal technique, ear training, sight singing, and solo and ensemble 
singing. 

                                                                                        1 credit 

THEA 118   Stage Make-up 

Introduces corrective and character make-up procedures for the stage.  

1 credit 

THEA 119  Creativity and the Creative Process 
       Students will explore ways to stimulate their creativity, identifying creative blocks and coming up with ways to work 
through  or  around  these  blocks,  as  well  as  developing  files  of  creative  prompts  for  use  in  generating  original  work. 
Prerequisite: BFA Theater Arts majors or by permission. 

2 credits 

THEA 137  Foundations of Musical Theatre Technique I 

 1 credit 

This course lays the foundations for musical theater techniques.  It is an introduction to the dramaturgical aspect of 
musical  theatre:  text  analysis,  exploration  of  music,  lyric  and  libretto  with  the  emphasis  on  the  American  musical. 
Prerequisites: MUS 123.. Prerequisite: THEA 136 

THEA 138  Survey of Musical Theatre  

2 credits 

The study of the history and styles of musical theatre through the use of musical recordings, video, television, film and 

archival footage. 

THEA 140, THEA 141  Production I, II 

2 credits 

Freshmen are assigned to crews as an introduction to general production techniques and procedures. Prerequisites: 

THEA 140 is an audition/interview and acceptance into the program; THEA 141 is THEA 140. 

THEA 200  Principles of Acting for Musical Theatre I 

2 credits 

Principles of Acting for Musical Theatre I is part one of a two semester course in which the student will explore the 
use of text, lyric and music  in various styles within Musical Theatre. Prerequisite: MUS 123, MUS 124 or permission from 
the chair. 

THEA 201  Principles of Acting for Musical Theatre II 

2 credits 

Principles  of  Acting  for  Musical  Theatre  II  is  part  two  of  a  two  semester  course  in  which  the  student  will  learn 
repertoire and explore  the skills required for the various styles of musical theater as it pertains to Musical Theatre auditions. 
Prerequisite: MUS 123, MUS 124 or permission from the chair. 

THEA 205, THEA 206  Acting III, IV 

2 credits 

An intermediate level course designed to strengthen basic acting skills with increased emphasis on  text analysis and 
character  development.  Includes  instruction  on  audition  techniques.  Open  to  theatre  performance  majors  only. 
Prerequisite: .Prerequisite for THEA 206 is THEA 205. 

THEA 207, THEA 208  Stage Movement II                                                                             

2 credits 

A year-long course. Builds upon stage movement one with an emphasis on strengthening kinesthetic skills and the 
exploration  of  physical  impulse  within  text.  Prerequisites:  Minimum  “C”  average  in  THEA  114/115.  For  acting  and 
performance & practice majors only.  

THEA 210, THEA 211 Directing I, II 

3 credits 

Fundamentals of directing the play beginning with analyzing the script, moving to physical planning of a performance 

to actual presentation of fully rehearsed scenes. Prerequisite for THEA 210 is THEA 109; THEA 211 is THEA 210. 

THEA 213, THEA 214  Voice and Speech III, IV 

2 credits 

The  study  of  phonetics,  clear  diction,  and  unaccented  speech  will  be  continued.  Voice  and  speech  skills  will  be 
expanded to include the exploration of text and heightened language. Various texts that place a greater physical and vocal 

384 

 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demand on the actor will be studied. Minimum "C" grade in THEA 104/105. For performance majors only. Prerequisite 
for THEA 214 is THEA 213. For performance majors only.  

THEA 218, THEA 219 Ensemble Lab II, IV                                                                              

2 credits 

This ensemble lab is an extension of the work in the current year's devising, playwriting, and directing classes. Topics 
may include: Improvisation, rehearsal and performance, devised work, movement, voice, acting techniques, text, and other 
special topics. Prereq:THEA119,BFA Theatre major or by permission 

THEA 225  Theatre History I 

3 credits 

A comprehensive survey of Western (and influential non-Western) theatre from classical times to the late 17th century. 

Open to all university majors.  

THEA 226  Theatre History II 

3 credits 

A comprehensive survey of Western (and influential non-Western) theatre from the 18th century to the present. Open 

to all university majors. 

THEA 230  Introduction to Theatre 

3 credits 

Introduction to Theatre is a beginning survey of the theatre arts - a starting point toward a general appreciation of the 
dramatic form and theatrical process. The course explores theatre’s historical significance and its contemporary relevance. 
Students will actively participate in several theatrical activities in the roles of playwrights, critics, actors and designers over 
eight weeks to develop some understanding of the collaborative process that goes into staging a play, in order that they may 
become informed artistic audiences in the future. 

THEA 237, THEA 238  Musical Theatre Techniques Level I,  II 

2 credits 

Song Analysis through the use of the fundamentals of acting and the exploration of text, lyric and music. Emphasis is 
placed  on  the  actor/singer's  interpretation  based  on  the  information  provided  by  the  composer,  lyricist  and  librettist. 
Prerequisites: THEA 137 with a minimum “C” average, B.F.A. Musical Theatre Majors Only.  

THEA 240, THEA 241  Production/Rehearsal/Performance I, II                                   

2 credits 

Advanced crew assignments and auditions for roles in theatre productions. Prerequisite: THEA 141. A student must 

be registered for production in order to be cast. Prerequisite: For THEA 240 - THEA 141, for THEA 241- THEA 240. 

THEA 250  Script Analysis  

2 credits 

An introduction to text analysis using a variety of techniques. Scripts will be analyzed and related back to the student’s 

specific area of study. Prerequisites: ENGL 101; THEA 225, Second semester Sophomore Theatre Arts major. 

THEA 251  Introduction to Dramaturgy                                                                
        An introduction to the many roles of the dramaturg in the theatre-making process. Students will complete assignments 
exploring the steps of production and new play dramaturgy and how to think about plays in conversation with the present 
moment. Students will leave this class with an understanding of the creative possibilities of dramaturgy and its ability to 
connect theatre artists and communities. Prerequisites: ENGL 101 and THEA 250 Script Analysis or PROD 145 Script 
Analysis. 

3 credits 

THEA 260  Devised Theatre I 
       This  course  introduces  students  to  the  collaborative  processes  and  aesthetics  essential  to  making  devised  theatre. 
Devised theatre is a collaborative, often improvisational form of work by a group of people that is often physically driven, 
and may utilize non-traditional narrative structures and aesthetics. A devised piece of theatre has a unified vision shaped 
through continuous group discussion and employing a variety of theatrical practices. Beginning with the exploration of an 
idea based in literature, images, historical or political events, devisers then develop a structure and sequence through a 
rehearsal process that culminates in performance. BFA Theatre Arts Major or by permission. 

3 credits 

THEA 261  Devised Theatre II 
       This  course  allows  students  to  continue  developing  the  collaborative  processes  and  aesthetics  essential  to  making 
devised theatre. Devised theatre is a collaborative, often improvisational form of work by a group of people that is often 
physically driven, and may utilize non-traditional narrative structures and aesthetics. A devised piece of theatre has a unified 
vision shaped through continuous group discussion and employing a variety of theatrical practices. Beginning with the 
exploration  of  an  idea  based  in  literature,  images,  historical  or  political  events,  devisers  then  develop  a  structure  and 
sequence through a rehearsal process that culminates in performance. BFA Theatre Arts Major or by permission. 

3 credits 

385 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THEA 270  Improvisation for the Actor  

2 credits 

The student will be encouraged to discover the possibilities of the imagination and to cultivate spontaneity, and will 
be provided with opportunities to exercise their possibilities.  The student will learn basic improvisational performance 
skills, and will use their skills to create original work.  Prerequisites:  Minimum “C” grade in THEA 102 and THEA 105. 

THEA 280  Playwriting I  

3 credits 

THEA 280 is an introduction to the craft of playwriting, with a focus on the basic elements of conflict, character, plot, 
dialogue, and setting and how they can be integrated to produce a stage-worthy short play. Prerequisites:  ENGL 101 or 
equivalent. 

THEA 281  Playwriting II 
         This course explores practical techniques for writing scripts for performance. Building on foundations of playwriting 
structure,  Playwriting  II  covers  techniques  for  crafting  long-form  narratives,  including  research  based  writing, 
autobiography, lyricism, and nontraditional structures. Prerequisites: THEA 280 or Instructor Approval. 

                                                                                                        3 credits 

THEA 290  Contemporary Drama: Plays & Playwrights 
       An  intensive  study  of  contemporary  drama,  including  major  plays/playwrights  and  established  and  emerging 
forms/genres of drama. Students will read, discuss, view, and write about contemporary drama and its diverse range of 
voices. Prerequisites: ENGL 101 

                                                     3 credits 

THEA 292  Introduction to Performance Studies                                                                
        This course introduces the field of performance studies and examines the performative nature of the continuum of 
human  actions  (  example,  theatre,  solo  performance,  ritual,  sports,  performance  art,  street  performance,  dance, 
music/sound/art  installations)  and  incorporate  aspects  of  theatre history,  theory  and  practice,  anthropology,  sociology, 
communication and cultural studies to understand the broad range of performance and how it impacts our society. This 
course will allow students to theorize performance studies through a practical project. Prerequisites: ENGL 101 

3 credits 

THEA 299  Theatre Internship I 
       Internships  provide  students  with  hands  on  experience  at  performing  arts  organizations.  Students  gain  practical 
experience,  enhance  skills  learned  in  the  classroom,  and  acquire  contacts  with  professionals  in  the  field.  Students  will 
receive one credit for every 50 hours worked with a cap of 150 hours and must be approved by the department prior to 
beginning their internship. They will be evaluated by their supervisor and prepare a report. Working as a performer, such 
as but not limited to acting, singing, dancing, and stand-up for the stage or the screen does not qualify for internship credit. 
Prerequisite: Theatre major, 3.0 GPA or greater, completion of 60 credit hours, with approval from the Major Director and 
the Department Chair. 

                                                     1-6 credits 

THEA 301  Acting V                                                                                                              
      An  advanced  acting  course  designed  to  strengthen  skills  by  incorporating  voice,  speech  and  movement  training, 
historical research and advanced acting skills with an emphasis on Shakespeare.  Prerequisite: THEA 205/206, 213/214.  
Open to BFA acting and musical theatre majors only, or by permission. 

2 credits 

THEA 302  Acting VI 

2 credits 

An advanced acting course designed to strengthen acting skills, integrating voice, speech, movement, and research on 
classical  or  stylized  material.    Prerequisite:  Minimum  C  grade  in  THEA  301.    Open  to  BFA  acting  majors  only,  or  by 
permission. 

THEA 303  Shakespeare: Page to Stage 
       This  course  introduces  students  to  the  plays  of  William  Shakespeare,  including  exploration  and  analysis  of  their 
structure,  themes,  plots,  language,  versification,  music,  and  characters.  Emphasis  will  be  on  transferring  knowledge  of 
Shakespeare's anon from "page to stage' via short performance projects linked to studies of the plays. BFA Theatre Arts 
Majors or by permission. 

3 credits 

THEA 304, THEA 305  Voice and Speech V, VI 

2 credits 

The voice and speech skills acquired in previous semesters will be applied to the exploration of text and heightened 
language. Various texts that place a greater physical and vocal demand on the actor will be studied. Prerequisite: Minimum 
of a C in THEA 213,214.  Open to BFA acting and MT majors only, or by permission. Prerequisite for THEA 305 is THEA 
301 and THEA 304. 

386 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THEA 307, THEA 308  Advanced Directing III, IV 

3 credits 

An advanced stage directing seminar in which the student director enhances their knowledge of both the art and craft 
of directing. The artistic aspects of craft, exploration of various styles, genres, and concepts, along with the organizational 
tools and communication skills necessary for the staging of drama will be studied. Prerequisites: THEA 211 and permission 
of instructor and department chair.  

THEA 309  Acting for the Camera 

3 credits 

The fundamentals of acting for film and television are reviewed and guidance is provided in independent research 
and creativity through scene study. Also included are seminars with guest lectures concerning the business aspect of the 
performing arts. Open to theatre performance majors, or by invitation. Prerequisite: THEA 207, Theatre Major. 

THEA 311, THEA 312  Stage Movement  III 

2 credits 

A year-long course with a concentration on extended and stylized movement with a focus on research, preparations 
and compositions. Prerequisites: Minimum “C” average in Movement Level II. Prerequisite for THEA 312 is THEA 311. 
For performance majors only.  

THEA 318, THEA 319 Ensemble Lab IV, V                                                                         

2 credits 

This  ensemble  lab  is  an  extension  of  the  work  in  the  current  year's  advanced  levels  in  directing,  playwriting, 
contemporary  drama,  and  performance  courses.  Topics  may  include:  Stage  combat,  devised  work,  rehearsal  and 
performance,  devised  work,  movement,  voice,  acting  techniques,  text,  and  other  special  topics.  Prereq:THEA218  ,BFA 
Theatre major or by permission. 

THEA 321  Repertoire 

2 credits 

The actor/singer actively learns the repertoire of material available to the musical theater performer. Emphasis is in 
the development of a book of songs with marketable and appropriate material. Prerequisites: THEA 237 and THEA 238 
with a minimum “C” average, and BFA Musical Theatre Major. 

THEA 322  Junior Musical Theatre Lab 

4 credits 

The  practical  application  of  all  aspects  of  actor  training  culminating  in  the  development  of  musical  theatre 
performance. Emphasis is on coachability, the rehearsal process, development of character and material and the relationship 
between the audience and performer. Prerequisites: THEA 237, 238, 337, and BFA Musical Theatre Major. 

THEA 323, THEA 324 Studio III                                                                                         

2 credits 

This  studio  is  an  extension  of  the  work  in  the  current  year’s  acting  classes.  Topics  may  include:  rehearsal  and 
performance, devised work, special techniques, and others. Open to BFA Acting majors only, or by invitation. Prerequisites: 
THEA 224, BFA Acting Major 

THEA 337, THEA 338 Musical Theatre Techniques Level III  

2 credits 

Continuing to apply the fundamentals of acting and the exploration of text, lyric and music , the actor/singer explores 
the various styles within the repertoire and the demands of heightened text as it relates to musical theater. The emphasis is 
on scene study. Prerequisites: THEA 237 and 238 with a minimum “C” average and B.F.A. Musical Theatre Majors Only  

THEA 340, THEA 341  Production/Rehearsal/Performance III, IV  

A continuation of THEA 241. Prerequisite: THEA 241. 

2 credits 

THEA 374  Experimental Theatre                                                                                         

3 credits 

This course will examine the movements and artists from the twentieth century to today, beginning with the Futurists 
and all forms of 'the new' that followed: avante-garde, Dada, Surrealism, Complicit, La Mama, SITI Company, Wooster 
Group, and others. Students will trace the Futurists' focus on speed, technology, youth, violence, and objects such as the 
car and industrial city to contemporary and emerging art forms, media, and performance today, and examine the century 
of avant-garde art that informs today's non-traditional theatre making. 

THEA 380  Advanced Playwriting Workshop I                                                                    

3 credits 

An advanced playwriting course designed to refine theatrical writing techniques with an emphasis on long-form scripts 
and professional practices. Students will engage in weekly assignments to develop a portfolio of polished, submission-ready 
playwriting material. Prerequisites: THEA 281 or Instructor permission. 

THEA 381  Advanced Playwriting Workshop II                                                               

3 credits 

An advanced playwriting course designed to refine theatrical writing techniques with an emphasis on long-form scripts 

387 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and professional practices. Students will engage in weekly assignments to develop a portfolio of polished, submission-ready 
playwriting material. Prerequisites: THEA 281 or Instructor permission. 

THEA 400  Senior Showcase  

3 credits 

A preparatory workshop for the annual New York City showcase, the capstone project for BFA performance majors. 
Emphasis  will  be  given  to  the  selection  and use  of  performance  material  (songs,  monologues,  choreography,  scenes)  in 
preparation for the performance of the showcase.  Additionally, emphasis will be placed on all aspects of a professional 
career in New York and other cities, including marketability, business acumen, audition and interview techniques, and 
relationships  with  agents,  managers  and  casting  directors.  Prerequisites:  BFA  Acting/Musical  Theatre  Major  in  good 
standing; Acceptance into the Showcase (NYC) 

THEA 403  Theatre Professional Seminar  

3 credits 

Students transitioning into the world of professional acting will greatly benefit from an introduction to the basics of 
the business. Theatre Professional Seminar will provide weekly seminars on a variety of topics from acting unions to taxes 
for  the  performer.  This  course  will  provide  students  with  the  necessary  information  to  operate  with  credibility  and 
competence in the world of professional theatre and aid in the transition from university to career. Prerequisites: Theatre 
major only, THEA206, 208, 210, 214, 238 or by permission of department chair. 

THEA 409  Advanced Topics in Musical Theatre 

2 credits 

Specific topics chosen for a specialized course of study for the advanced musical theatre student. Prerequisites: Musical 

Theatre Major 

THEA 411, THEA 412 Stage Movement IV                                                                            

2 credits 

This is an advanced level course  that helps the actor synthesize their stage movement training. Special topics may 
include stage combat, and may also include demonstrating specific techniques, and non-naturalistic styles, among others. 
THEA 411 is a prerequisite for advancement into THEA 412. Open to BFA Acting majors only, or by invitation.  

THEA 413  Voice and Speech VII 

2 credits 

This  course  will  focus  on  special  topics  in  voice  and  speech  with  an  emphasis  in  preparing  the  student  for  the 
professional world. Areas of specialization may include voice over technique. Prerequisite: Minimum ‘C’ grade in THEA 
304 and 305.  For performance majors only.  

THEA 414  Voice and Speech VIII 

2 credits 

This  course  will  focus  on  special  topics  in  voice  and  speech  with  an  emphasis  in  preparing  the  student  for  the 
professional world. Areas of specialization may include voice over technique, Alexander work, or other topics suitable for 
advanced level study. Prerequisite: THEA 413.  For performance majors only. 

THEA 415, THEA 416 Acting VII , VIII                                                                          

2 credits 

This is an advanced-level course that helps the actor synthesize their training. Special topics may include: specific acting 
techniques, development of a major role, ensemble creation, solo performance, and non-naturalistic styles, among others. 
THEA415 is a prerequisite for advancement into THEA416. Prerequisites: THEA 302. Open to BFA acting majors only, 
or by invitation by the department chair.  

THEA 423  Studio V                                                                                                       
         This studio is an extension of the work in previous semesters of performance classes. Topics may include: rehearsal 
and  performance,  devised  work,  special  techniques,  or  other  skill  sets  deemed  most  useful  to  the  cohort.  BFA  Acting 
Seniors. 

2 credits 

THEA 437, THEA 438 Musical Theatre Techniques Level IV                                   

2 credits 

An advanced class for the fourth year musical theatre major. Emphasis is given to further developing the skills required 
for  the  various  styles  of  musical  theater  and  expanding  the  repertoire  in  preparation  for  entering  the  profession.  
Prerequisite: THEA 322, 337, 338, and B.F.A. Musical Theatre Majors Only. 

THEA 470  Senior Capstone   

3 credits 

This senior capstone is a performance project that synthesizes a student's skills in performance, communication, and 
scholarship utilizing research, analysis, interpretation, rehearsal, meetings with a faculty advisor, production director or 
other artistic staff, written components, and culminating in a performance.  Topics and theatrical forms are negotiable 

388 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(devised  work,  original  play,  etc.),  as  is  exploration/collaboration  with  additional  disciplines  (dance,  design,  etc.)  or 
professional employment/internship. Prerequisites: By permission of instructor. 

THEA 194, THEA 294        Special Topics                                                               

3 credits 

THEA 295, THEA395, THEA 495 
Special Topics in Theatre Arts I, II, III 

THEA 296, THEA 396, THEA 496  
Independent Study in Theatre Arts I, II, III 

1-6 credits 

1-6 credits 

UNIV – UNIVERSITY EXPERIENCE 

UNIV 101   City-University Life   

3 credits 

This course introduces students to the kinds of communities that people construct for themselves (e.g. social, political, 
artistic, etc.) and the values and dynamics that define such communities (e.g. cooperation, civility, tolerance, responsibility, 
etc.). The notion of what it means to be a responsible member of the “community” will actively be explored and discussed 
by engagement and analysis of multiple communities: the classroom community, the Point Park University community, 
and  the  Pittsburgh  community.  Students  will  also  examine  the  responsibilities  they  have  to  their  personal  academic 
development.  

UNIV 102   University and Community Life 

3 credits 

This course introduces students to the kinds of communities that people construct for themselves (e.g. social, political, 
artistic, etc.), explores how those communities are defined, and analyzes the values and dynamics that define online and 
on-ground communities.  The notion of what it means to be a responsible member of the “community” will actively be 
explored  and  discussed  through  engagement  and  analysis  of  multiple  communities  including  the  online  classroom 
community and the Point Park University community. Students will also begin to develop research skills, and analyze and 
create texts with attention to audience and purpose. 

389 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HONORARY DEGREE RECIPIENTS 

1973  Mr. Ronald Davenport 

2002  The Honorable Steven Zappala 

1974  Mr. Ronald Gerhart 

2003  Mr. Kishore Gopaul 

1978  Mr. Aaron Levinson 

2003  Mr. & Mrs. Fletcher Hodges 

1982  Mr. Paul Long 

1984  Mr. Joseph Strick 

1989  Mr. William Block 

2004  Mrs. Ellen Gamble 

2004  Commander Gwendolyn Elliott 

2004  Dr. Marylouise Fennell 

1990  Mr. & Mrs. Henry Hillman 

2005  Dr. Maxwell King 

1991  Mr. John Johnson 

1991  Ms. Shirley Jones 

1993  Dr. Doreen Boyce 

2005  Mr. & Mrs. John Bitzer 

2006  Dr. Paul Caplan 

2006  Gertrude (Mrs. Paul) Caplan 

1995  Ms. Michele Ridge 

2006  Ms. Vaunda Micheaux Nelson 

1996  Mr. Richard Tucker 

2007  Ms. Lynn R. Fero 

1997  Ms. Dolores Bold 

2007  Dr. J. Matthew Simon 

1997  Mr. Robert Pompeani 

2009  Governor Edward G. Rendell 

1998  Dr. Jay Apt 

2009  Mr. Mark Roosevelt 

1998  Ms. Phyllis Garland 

2010  Mr. Shea Gopaul 

1999  The Honorable Cynthia Baldwin 

2010  Mr. Robert Ashford 

1999  Mr. & Mrs. Jon Boscia 

2011  Mr. Steven B. Stein 

1999  Dr. Freddie Fu 

2012   Mr. Dennis Yablonsky 

2000  Ms. Nadine Bognar 

2013   Robert A. Miller 

2000  Mr. Frank Bolden 

2000  Mr. James Miller 

2001  Ms. Colleen Marshall 

2001  The Most Reverend Bishop Donald W. Wuerl 

2001  Ms. Freida Shapira 

2013   Herman L. Reid Jr. 

2013   Arthur Ziegler Jr. 

2014   Nancy Washington 

2016   Charlie Batch 

2016   Tony Yazbeck 

2002  Ms. Melina Kanakaredes 

2019   Karen McIntyre 

2022   James Withers                                                                     2022   Brian Robert McFeeley 

2025  Mr. Steve Blass 

390 

 
 
 
 
 
 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
Lisa M. Cibik M.D., FACS, Chair 
Jamie Inferrera, Esq., Vice Chair 
David S. Duncan, Secretary  
Bridget Mancosh, Treasurer 

Joann Baney 
Gary Bethel 
Lisa M. Cibik, M.D., Chair 
Jeffrey E. Cohen 
Matt Cunningham 
Louis A. DiNardo 
David S. Duncan 
Daryl Fields, MD PhD 
Ed Haberle 
Jamie Inferrera, Esq. 
Kevin McMahon 
Rob Mercuri 
Jimmy Miller 
Rich Pegher 
Jeff Poffenberger 
Robin Randall 
Peggy Schiavone, Ed.D. 
John R. Tomayko, Ph.D. 
Saurabh Tripathi 
Barbara Vankirk 
Travis Williams 

EMERITI 
Dennis Cestra 
Joseph D. Dionisio 
Thomas W. Golonski 
Charles A. Gomulka 
Thomas W. Hubbell 
Donald Jenkins 
Thomas R. Kaplan 
Anne Lewis 
Paul Meese 
Richard E. Rauh 
Steven B. Stein 
Nancy D. Washington, Ph.D. 
Nancy H. Zelonka, Ph.D. 

PRESIDENT EMERITUS 
Paul Hennigan, Ed.D. 

EX OFFICIO 
Chris W. Brussalis, Ed.D. (University President) 
Stephanie Schmader  (Alumni Association President) 
Ashley Bruder (Staff Assembly President) 
Christian Rangel  (Student Government Association 
President) 
Doreen Ciletti (Faculty Assembly President) 

391 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CABINET 

CHRIS  BRUSSALIS,  University  President; 
Ed.D.,  Northeastern  University;  M.A. 
University  of 
Illinois;  B.S.,  Allegheny 
College. 

TED  BLACK,  Senior  Vice  President  of 
Institutional  Advancement  and  Strategy; 
B.A.  Allegheny  College;  J.D.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh 

CHRIS  CHONCEK,  Associate  Vice 
President  of  Institutional  Research  and 
Planning;  B.S., 
Indiana  University  of 
Pennsylvania; M.S., University of Hartford  

COLLINGWOOD, 

MARLIN 
Vice 
President  of  Enrollment;  B.A.,  Anderson 
University 

JUSTIN  DELECKI,  Vice  President  and 
General  Counsel;  B.A.,  Niagara  University; 
M.B.A.,  Point  Park  University  J.D.,  Ohio 
Northern University 

BRIDGET  MANCOSH,  Senior  Vice 
President  of  Finance  and  Operations;  B.S., 
Clarion  University;  E.M.B.A.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh; C.P.A. 

SHARI  PAYNE,  Provost  and  Senior  Vice 
President  of  Academic  Affairs;  Ed.D., 
University of Pittsburgh; M.S. Robert Morris 
University, B.A., University of Pittsburgh.  

KEITH PAYLO, Dean of Students and Vice 
President  of  Student  Affairs;  B.S.,  M.B.A., 
Robert Morris University 

NATALIE RICE, Vice President of Human 
Resources;  B.A.,  University  of  Pittsburgh; 
M.B.A., Robert Morris University 

SCOTT SWAIN, Vice President of Athletics; 
M.S.,  Miami  University  (OH);  B.S.,  Ohio 
State University.  

FACULTY 

JOHN  J.  AMPLAS,  Professor  Emeritus  of 
Theatre, 
Theatre, 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.F.A., 

Department 

of 

Point Park University 

RAYMOND “BERNIE” ANKNEY, Dean of 
School 
Ph.D., 
of  Communication. 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
M.A.,  Syracuse  University;  B.A.,  Indiana 
University of Pennsylvania.  

BETHANY ARONSON, Associate Professor 
of  Psychology,  Department  of  Psychology, 
School of Arts & Sciences; B.A., University 
of  Prince  Edward  Island;  M.A.,  Brook 
University;  Ph.D.,  University  of  West 
Georgia  

MILIA  AYACHE,  Assistant  Professor  of 
Theatre,  Conservatory  of  the  Performing 
Arts;  M.F.A.,  Moscow  Art  Theatre;  B.A., 
American University in Beirut  

THOM  BAGGERMAN,  Professor  of 
Broadcast  Journalism  and  Chair,  School  of 
Communication; 
State 
University;  M.S.,  Robert  Morris  University; 
Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh 

B.A., 

Kent 

ZEVA  BARZELL-CANALI,  Professor  of 
Theatre,  Department  of  Theatre,  School  of 
Theatre, Film, and Animation, Conservatory 
of  Performing  Arts;  B.F.A.,  Ithaca  College; 
Illinois  Urbana-
M.F.A.,  University  of 
Champagne 

RACHEL BATTAGLIA, Assistant Professor 
of  Psychology,  Department  of  Psychology, 
School of Arts & Sciences; B.S., University of 
Pittsburgh; M.S., Psy.D., Carlow University 

BEVERLY BAUTISTA, Assistant Professor, 
Department  of  Commercial  Dance,  School 
of Dance, Conservatory of Performing Arts; 
B.S.,  Ball  State  University;  M.F.A., 
University of California, Irvine 

PAIGE  BEAL,  Professor  of  Sports,  Arts, 
Entertainment, 
and  Music  Business; 
Rowland  School  of  Business;  B.A.,  Hood 
College; M.B.A., University of Pittsburgh 

AMY  KIM  BELL,  Professor  Emerita  of 
English  as  a  Second  Language,  Department 
of  Literary  Arts  and  Department  of 
Humanities  and  Social  Sciences,  School  of 
Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A.,  West  Virginia 
University;  M.A.,  University  of  Pittsburgh; 
TESOL Certificate 

392 

 
 
DENISE  BEVERINA  MOORE,  Senior 
Lecturer,  School  of  Education;  B.S., 
California University of Pennsylvania; M.A., 
West Virginia University 

Professor  Department 

BHATTACHARYA, 
SHAMAYETA 
Assistant 
of 
Community  Engagement  and  Leadership, 
Rowland  School  of  Business;  B.S.,  M.S, 
Presidency  University;  Ph.D.,  University  of 
Connecticut 

Professor 

AARON  BOLLINGER, 
of 
Theatre,  Department  of  Theatre,  School  of 
Theatre, Film, and Animation, Conservatory 
of  Performing  Arts;  B.F.A.,  University  of 
Central Florida; M.F.A., Yale University 

LAURA  BOYD,  Professor  Department  of 
Film  and  Animation,  School  of  Theatre, 
Film,  and  Animation,  Conservatory  of 
Performing  Arts;  B.A.,  William  Patterson 
University;  M.F.A.,  Montana 
State 
University 

WILLIAM  H.  BRESLOVE,  Professor  of 
Business  Management,  Rowland  School  of 
Business;  B.S.,  M.I.B.M.,  Point  Park 
University;  M.S.,  M.S.,  Ph.D.,  Carnegie 
Mellon University 

BRITNEY  BRINKMAN,  Professor  of 
Psychology,  School  of  Arts  and  Sciences; 
B.S.,  University  of  Utah;  M.S.,  Ph.D., 
Colorado State University 

GEORGE  C.  BROMALL  II,  Professor  of 
Business  Management,  Rowland  School  of 
Business;  B.S.,  Point  Park  University;  J.D., 
Duquesne University 

MICHAEL  CAMPAYNO,  Artist 
in 
Residence, Department of Theatre; School of 
Theatre, Film, and Animation; Conservatory 
of Performing Arts; B.F.A., Carnegie Mellon 
University 

ROBIN  CECALA,  Professor  of  Broadcast 
Production,  School  of  Communication; 
Ph.D.,  University  of  Southern  Mississippi; 
M.S.,  Duquesne  University;  B.S.,  State 
University of New York 

VIRGINIA 
Associate 
CHAMBERS, 
Professor  and  Interim  Dean,  School  of 
Education;  B.S.,  The  Pennsylvania  State 

University;  M.Ed.,  University  of  Virginia; 
Ed.D., University of Pittsburgh 

NELSON 
Professor, 
CHIPMAN, 
Department of Film and Animation; School 
of  Theatre, 
and  Animation; 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.S., 
University  of  Virginia;  M.F.A.,  New  York 
University; Ed.D., Northeastern University 

Film, 

AMY  CESARIO,  Assistant  Professor  of 
Accounting,  Rowland  School  of  Business; 
B.A.,  Point  Park  University;  M.B.A.,  Jones 
International University, C.P.A 

DORENE CILETTI, Professor, Department 
of  Management,  Rowland  School  of 
Business;  B.S,  M.B.A,  Ph.D.,  Duquesne 
University 

CHERYL CLARK, Professor of Accounting, 
Chair  of  Department  of  Business  Analytics 
& Technology, Rowland School of Business; 
B.S.,  M.B.A., 
Indiana  University  of 
Pennsylvania; C.P.A.  

MELINDA  COLAIZZI,  Assistant  Professor 
of  Sports  Arts,  Entertainment,  and  Music 
Business; Rowland School of Business; B.M., 
Berklee College of Music  

LLOYD CULBREATH, Artist in Residence 
-  Jazz  Dance,  Department  of  Commercial 
Dance,  School  of  Dance,  Conservatory  of 
Performing Arts 

APRIL  DARAS,  Associate  Professor, 
Department  of  Theatre;  School  of  Theatre, 
Film,  and  Animation;  Conservatory  of 
Performing  Arts;  B.F.A.,  M.F.A.,  Florida 
State University  

JOSEPH  DEFAZIO,  Senior  Lecturer, 
Rowland  School  of  Business;  B.A., 
Mercyhurst  College;  M.S.,  California 
University; Ph.D., Northcentral University 

NORBERT  DE  LA  CRUZ,  III,  Visiting 
Assistant  Professor, Department of Concert 
Dance,  School  of  Dance,  Conservatory  of 
Performing Arts; B.F.A., The Julliard School; 
M.F.A., Hollins University  

STANLEY  E.  DENTON,  Professor  of 
Education,  School  of  Education;  B.S., 

393 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Morehouse College; M.S., Ph.D., University 
of Pittsburgh 

ROBERT  DERDA,  Associate  Professor, 
Chair  of  Department  of  Sports,  Arts, 
Entertainment,  and 
  Music  Business; 
Rowland  School  of  Business;  B.A.,  M.S., 
Duquesne University 

ELISE  D'HAENE,  Senior  Teaching  Artist, 
Department of Film and Animation; School 
of  Theatre, 
and  Animation; 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.A., 
Oakland University; M.S., Ph.D., University 
of Southern California 

Film, 

MARION  DIXON,  Associate  Professor  of 
of  Literature, 
Sociology,  Department 
Culture,  and  Society,  School  of  Arts  and 
Sciences; B.A., University of Michigan; M.S, 
Ph.D., Cornell University  

HANNA  DOLLISH,  Assistant  Professor  of 
Biology, Department of Natural Sciences and 
Engineering,  School  of  Arts  and  Sciences; 
B.S.,  University  of  Pittsburgh;  Ph.D., 
University of Arizona  

KELLY  DONNELLAN,  Associate  Professor 
in the Department of  Film and Animation; 
School  of  Theatre,  Film,  and  Animation; 
Conservatory  of  the  Performing  Arts;  B.S., 
Russell  Sage  College;  B.F.A.,  University  of 
North Carolina School of the Arts; M.F.A., 
American University  

AIMEE-MARIE  DORSTEN,  Professor  of 
Journalism  and  Mass  Communication, 
School  of  Communication;  B.S.,  Ohio 
University;  M.A.,  University  of  Georgia; 
M.A., Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh 

CAMILLE  DOWNING,  Senior  Lecturer, 
School  of  Communication;  B.S.,  Clarion 
University; M.A., Point Park University 

Professor 

of 
TATYANA  DUMOVA, 
of 
Communication, 
Communication;  B.A.,  Moscow  State 
Linguistic University;  M.A., Ph.D., Bowling 
Green State University 

School 

KAREN  DWYER,  Professor  of  English, 
Department  of  Literature,  Culture,  and 
Society,  School  of  Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A., 
Loyola College; M.A., Ph.D., The University 

394 

of Illinois, Chicago 

CHRISTAL  EDMUNDS,  Professor  of 
Education, School of Education; B.S., Ph.D., 
Pennsylvania State University 

ELISABETH  EHRLICH,  Senior  Lecturer, 
School  of  Education;  B.A.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh;  M.S.,  State  University  of  New 
York at Brockport; D.Ed., Indiana University 
of Pennsylvania 

JULIA  ERICKSON,  Assistant  Professor, 
Department  of  Concert  Dance,  School  of 
Dance,  Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts; 
B.A., University of Pittsburgh 

DAVID  J.  FABILLI,  Professor  Emeritus, 
School of Communication; B.A., Duquesne 
University;  M.A.,  Youngstown 
State 
University 

JESSE  FACTOR,  Assistant  Professor  of 
Dance 
-  Modern  and  Contemporary; 
Department  of  Concert  Dance,  School  of 
Dance,  Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts; 
B.F.A., Tisch School of the Arts; M.F.A., The 
University of Iowa 

HELEN  M.  FALLON,  Professor  Emerita, 
School of Communication; B.A., Point Park 
University; M.A., Duquesne University 

NATHAN  N.  FIRESTONE,  Professor 
Emeritus of Political Science, Department of 
Humanities  and  Social  Sciences,  School  of 
Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A.,  M.P.I.A.,  J.D., 
University of Pittsburgh 

CRYSTAL FRAZIER, Associate Professor of 
Dance,  Department  of  Commercial  Dance, 
School  of  Dance,  Conservatory  of  the 
Performing  Arts;  M.F.A., 
Jacksonville 
University 

APRIL  FRIGES,  Associate  Professor  of 
Photography/Photojournalism,  School  of 
Communication;  B.F.A.,  University  of 
Akron;  M.F.A.,  University  of  California, 
Irvine 

LAURA  FROST,  Professor  of  Biology, 
Department  of  Natural  Sciences  and 
Engineering,  School  of  Arts  and  Sciences; 
B.S.,  California  University  of  Pennsylvania; 
M.S.,  Iowa  State  University;  Ph.D.,  West 

 
 
Virginia University 

MICHELE  FYOLA,  Professor  of  Business 
Management,  Department  Management, 
Rowland  School  of  Business;  A.S.,  Robert 
Morris  University;  B.S.,  M.B.A.,  Point  Park 
University; Ph.D., Robert Morris University 

RICHARD GARRIS, Assistant Professor of 
Education, School of Education; B.S., M.S., 
California University of Pennsylvania; Ph.D., 
Robert Morris University 

ROBERT  C.  GARSON,  Professor  of  Civil 
Engineering  Technology,  Department  of 
Natural Sciences and Engineering, School of 
Arts  and  Sciences;  B.S.C.E.,  M.S.C.E., 
Ph.D.,  Case  Western  Reserve  University; 
P.E. 

GILFILLAN, 

MARGARET 
Professor 
Emerita  of  Accounting,  Rowland  School  of 
Business; B.A., Pennsylvania State University; 
M.B.A., University of Pittsburgh; C.P.A 

CHRISTOPHER  GIRMAN,  Associate 
Professor  of  Creative  Writing,  Non-Fiction, 
Department  of  Literature,  Culture,  and 
Society, School of Arts & Sciences; B.A., The 
George  Washington  University;  J.D./M.A., 
The  University  of  Texas  at  Austin;  M.F.A., 
The University of Texas Pan-American; Ph.D., 
University of Illinois at Chicago 

JANICE  GLUNK,  Professor,  School  of 
Education; B.S., M.S., Duquesne University; 
Ed.D., University of Pittsburgh 

Professor, 
GREGORY, 
TERESA 
Department of Community Engagement and 
Leadership,  Rowland  School  of  Business; 
B.F.A., Ithaca College; M.F.A., University of 
California, Los Angeles 

RICHARD  GUTKIND,  Professor 
of 
Education,  School  of  Education;  B.S., 
Carnegie  Mellon  University;  M.Ed.,  Ph.D., 
University of Pittsburgh 

ANDREW  HALASZ,  Professor  and  Chair, 
Department of Film and Animation; School 
and  Animation; 
of  Theatre, 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.A., 
William  Paterson  University;  M.F.A., 
Chatham College 

Film, 

STEVEN HALLOCK, Professor Emeritus of 
Journalism, School of Communication; B.S., 
University  of  Colorado;  M.A.,  Point  Park 
University; Ph.D., Ohio University 

H  HADEN  HAMMOND,  Assistant 
Professor of Animation, Department of Film 
and Animation; School of Theatre, Film, and 
Animation;  Conservatory  of  Performing 
Arts; A.S., Full Sail University 

KIRSTIN  C.  HANLEY,  Associate  Professor 
of  Composition  and  Rhetoric  and  Director 
of  University  Writing  Program,  Chair  of 
Department  of  Literature,  Culture,  and 
Society, School of Arts & Sciences; B.A., The 
Pennsylvania  State  University;  Ph.D., 
University of Pittsburgh 

RICHARD  HAWKINS,  Senior  Teaching 
Artist, Department of Film and Animation; 
School  of  Theatre,  Film,  and  Animation; 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.A., 
Centenary College 

J.  DWIGHT  HINES,  Professor  of  Literary 
Arts and Social Justice Studies, Department 
of Literature, Culture, and Society, School of 
Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A.,  University  of 
Wyoming; M.A., Louisiana State University; 
M.A., Ph.D., University of California, Santa 
Barbara 

LINDA  HIPPERT,  Associate  Dean  and 
Associate  Professor  of Education, School of 
Education;  B.S.,  Indiana  University  of  PA; 
M.B.A.,  University  of  Pittsburgh;  Ed.D., 
Duquesne University 

SOREN HOGSGAARD, Professor Emeritus 
of Public Administration, Rowland School of 
Business;  B.A.,  M.A.,  University  of  South 
Florida 

COLLEEN  HOOPER,  Associate  Professor, 
School of Dance, Conservatory of Performing 
Arts;  B.A.,  The  George  Washington 
University; M.F.A., Ph.D., Temple University 

RYAN  HOOVER,  Assistant  Professor  of 
Mechanical  Engineering,  Department  of 
Natural Sciences and Engineering, School of 
Arts & Sciences; B.S., M.S., Ph.D., Carnegie 
Mellon University  

TIMOTHY  HUDSON,  Professor  Emeritus 

395 

 
of  Journalism  and  Mass  Communication, 
School  of  Communication;  B.S.,  M.A., 
Eastern  New  Mexico  University;  Ph.D., 
Temple University 

DORA ION, Associate Professor of Political 
Science, Department of Literature, Culture, 
and  Society,  School  of  Arts  &  Sciences; 
Ph.D., Wayne State University 

MARYBETH 
IRVIN,  Visiting  Assistant 
Professor, School of Education; B.S., M.Ed., 
Ph.D., The Pennsylvania State University 

ISA,  Assistant  Professor 

of 
DAUD 
Communication, 
of 
Communication; B.S.S., M.S.S. University of 
Dhaka;  M.S.,  West  Virginia  University; 
Ph.D., University of Georgia 

School 

ANGELA  ISAAC,  Professor  Emeriti  of 
Finance,  Department  of  Business  Analytics 
and  Technology,  Rowland  School  of 
Business;  B.A.,  M.B.A.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh; M.A., Ph.D., State University of 
New York, Binghamton 

GREGG  JOHNSON,  Associate  Professor, 
Department  of  Natural  Sciences  and 
Engineering, School of Arts & Sciences; B.S., 
Gustavus  Adolphus  College;  Ph.D.,  Ohio 
University 

FREDRICK 
Professor, 
JOHNSON, 
Department of Film and Animation; School 
of  Theatre, 
and  Animation; 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.S., 
Pennsylvania  State  University;  M.F.A., 
University of Southern California  

Film, 

JAE MAN JOO, Assistant Professor of Dance 
-  Ballet,  Department  of  Concert  Dance, 
School  of  Dance,  Conservatory  of  the 
Performing 
B.F.A.,  Dankook 
University 

Arts; 

DANIEL  KARASIK,  Teaching  Artist, 
Department  of  Concert  Dance,  School  of 
Dance,  Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts; 
B.F.A.,  Point  Park  University;  M.F.A., 
Wilson College 

RICHARD  KEITEL,  Professor  of  Theatre, 
Department  of  Theatre;  School  of  Theatre, 
Film,  and  Animation;  Conservatory  of 

Performing  Arts;  B.A.,  State  University  of 
New York at Oneonta; M.F.A., University of 
Pittsburgh 

DONALD  M.  KELLER,  Professor  of 
Electrical  Engineering,  Department  of 
Natural Sciences and Engineering, School of 
Arts  and  Sciences;  B.S.E.E.,  M.S.,  Ph.D., 
Virginia  Polytechnic  Institute  and  State 
University; P.E. 

JAY  E.  KIRK,  Professor  Emeritus  of  Dance, 
Department  of  Dance,  Conservatory  of 
Performing  Arts;  B.A.,  Mercyhurst  College; 
M.F.A., University of Oklahoma 

Professor 

KNORR, 

HELENA 
of 
Organizational  Leadership,  Department  of 
Management,  Rowland  School  of  Business; 
B.A.,  Universidad  del  Pais  Vasco;  M.Ed., 
Ph.D., University of Minnesota 

DIMITRIS 
J.  KRANIOU,  Professor  of 
International  Business  Management  and 
Economics,  Rowland  School  of  Business; 
B.A., M.A., Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh 

DIANE  C.  KRILL,  Professor  of  Biology, 
Department  of  Natural  Sciences  and 
Engineering,  School  of  Arts  &  Sciences; 
B.A.,  M.S.,  Youngstown  State  University; 
M.P.H.,  University  of  Pittsburgh;  Ph.D., 
Case Western Reserve University 

JOHN  J.  KUDLAC,  Professor  Emeritus  of 
Earth Sciences and Engineering Technology, 
Department  of  Natural  Sciences  and 
Engineering, School of Arts & Sciences; B.S., 
City  College  of  New  York;  M.S.,  Michigan 
State  University;  M.S.,  Ph.D.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh 

KEISHA  LALAMA,  Professor  and  Interim 
Dean,  School  of  Theatre,  Film,  and 
Animation;  Conservatory  of  Performing 
Arts;  B.A.,  Point  Park  University;  M.F.A., 
Goddard College 

GARFIELD  LEMONIUS,  Professor  and 
Dean, School of Dance; Artistic Director of 
the  Conservatory  of  the  Performing  Arts; 
B.F.A.,  York  University;  M.F.A.,  Southern 
Methodist University; B.Ed., York University 

MICHELE  LEYSHON,  Assistant  Professor, 
School  of  Education;  B.S.,  Slippery  Rock 

396 

 
 
 
 
 
 
University;  M.Ed.,  University  of  Arkansas; 
Ed.D., University of Pittsburgh 

RICHARD  LINZER,  Professor  of  Criminal 
Justice,  Department  of  Criminal  Justice  and 
Intelligence  Studies,  School  of  Arts  & 
Sciences;  B.A.,  Point  Park  University;  J.D., 
University of Akron 

YAN  LIU,  Associate  Professor  Civil 
Engineering, Department of Natural Sciences 
and Engineering, School of Arts & Sciences; 
B.S.,  M.S.  Tongji  University;  Ph.D.,  Case 
Western Reserve University. 

JENNA LO CASTRO, Associate Professor of 
Public  Relations  and  Advertising,  School  of 
John  Carrol 
B.A., 
Communication; 
University; M.A., Ph.D., Duquesne University 

Senior 

LONG, 

Lecturer, 
KRISTY 
Department  of  Natural  Sciences 
and 
Engineering, School of Arts & Sciences; B.S., 
The Pennsylvania State University; M.S., The 
University of New Mexico 

KIKI LUCAS,  Associate Professor of Dance, 
Chair of Department of Commercial Dance, 
School  of  Dance,  Conservatory  of 
the 
Performing Arts; B.A., Point Park University; 
M.F.A., Montclair State University  

ELAINE  LUTHER,  Professor  of  Business 
Management,  Department  of  Management, 
Rowland  School  of  Business;  B.S.,  M.B.A., 
University of Pittsburgh; D.Sc., Robert Morris 
University 

ARCHISH  MAHARAJA,  Professor  of 
Business  Management,  Rowland  School  of 
Business;  BCom.,  Gujarat  University; 
M.B.A.,  Point  Park  University;  Ed.D. 
Duquesne University; CPA/PFS, CFP 

DARLENE  B.  MARNICH,  Professor  of 
Education, School of Education; B.S., Point 
Park  University;  B.A.,  M.Ed.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh; Ph.D., Preston University 

Professor 

MARK  MARNICH, 
of 
Mathematics,  Department  of  Natural 
Sciences and Engineering, School of Arts & 
Sciences;  B.S.,  Carnegie  Mellon  University; 
M.A., Ed.D., University of Pittsburgh 

Teaching  Artist,  Department  of  Theatre; 
School  of  Theatre,  Film,  and  Animation; 
Conservatory  of  Performance  Arts;  B.M., 
University  of  Evansville;  M.A.,  Middlebury 
at 
Institute  of 
Monteray 

International  Studies 

SEAN  MARTIN,  Associate  Professor  and 
Chair, Continuing and Professional Studies; 
Associate Professor, Department of Criminal 
Justice  and  Intelligence  Studies,  School  of 
Arts & Sciences; B.A., University of Toledo; 
M.A., 
Eastern  Michigan  University; 
Professional  Certificate,  B.A.,  M.S.,  Point 
Park University; Ph.D., College of Advanced 
Education  and  Martial  Arts  Studies;  Ph.D., 
Duquesne University 

H. 

STEPHANIE 
MAYER-STALEY, 
Professor, Department of Theatre; School of 
Theatre, Film, and Animation; Conservatory 
of  Performing  Arts;  B.E.S.,  St.  Cloud  State 
University;  M.F.A.,  California 
State 
University, Long Beach 

JESSICA  MCCORT, Associate  Professor  of 
Composition  and  Rhetoric,  Department  of 
Literature,  Culture,  and  Society,  School  of 
Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A.,  Pennsylvania  State 
University;  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Washington 
University 

JASON  MCDOLE,  Associate  Professor  of 
Dance,  Department  of  Concert  Dance, 
of 
School 
Performing Arts; B.F.A., The Julliard School; 
M.F.A. Goddard College 

of  Dance,  Conservatory 

ROBERT  G.  MCINERNEY,  Professor  of 
Psychology,  Department  of  Psychology, 
School  of  Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A.,  Montclair 
State  University;  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Duquesne 
University 

KAREN  MCINTYRE, 
of 
Education,  School  of  Education;  B.A., 
M.Ed., Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh 

Professor 

SHEILA MCKENNA, Professor of Theatre, 
Department  of  Theatre;  School  of  Theatre, 
Film,  and  Animation,  Conservatory  of 
Performing  Arts;  B.F.A.,  Point  Park 
University; M.F.A., University of Pittsburgh 

TIMOTHY 

MARQUETTE, 

Senior 

EDWARD A. MEENA, Professor of History, 

397 

 
Department  of  Literature,  Culture,  and 
Society,  School  of  Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A., 
Point  Park  University;  M.Ed.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh; M.A., Duquesne University 

SANDRA  MERVOSH,  Associate  Professor 
and  Chair,  Department  of  Business 
Management,  Rowland  School  of  Business; 
B.S.,  Clarion  University  of  Pennsylvania; 
M.S., La Roche College 

ROBERT  MEYERS,  Associate  Professor  of 
Multimedia,  School  of  Communication; 
B.F.A.,  Bowling  Green  State  University; 
M.F.A., Kent State University 

KRISTEN  MISUTKA,  Assistant  Professor, 
School  of  Education;  B.S.,  Penn  State 
University; M.Ed., Slippery Rock University; 
Ph.D., Gannon University 

DAVID  MORRISON,  Associate  Professor, 
Department of Film and Animation; School 
and  Animation; 
of  Theatre, 
Conservatory  of 
the  Performing  Arts; 
M.F.A.,  Full  Sail  University;  B.F.A., 
Edinboro University of PA 

Film, 

MULVIHILL, 

Associate 
PATRICK 
Professor,  Department 
Business 
Management,  Rowland  School  of  Business; 
B.S.,  Edinboro  University;  M.S.,  Robert 
Morris University; Ed.D., Indiana University 
of Pennsylvania  

of 

of 

PATTABHIRAJU  MUNDRU,  Associate 
Professor 
Engineering, 
Electrical 
Department  of  Natural  Sciences  and 
Jawaharlal  Nehru 
Engineering;  B.T., 
Technological  University;  M.S.,  Ph.D., 
Louisiana Tech University 

in  Residence 
GEOFF  MUNN,  Artist 
Department of Film and Animation; School 
of  Theatre, 
and  Animation, 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.S.,  Art 
Institute of Pittsburgh 

Film, 

SAMUEL  MUÑOZ,  Associate  Professor  of 
Stage  Movement,  Department  of  Theatre; 
School  of  Theatre,  Film,  and  Animation; 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.A., 
Columbia  College  of  Chicago;  M.F.A., 
Florida Atlantic University 

398 

Lecturer, 
MURPHY, 
CONNOR 
Department  of  Natural  Sciences  and 
Engineering, School of Arts & Sciences; B.S., 
Dickinson College; Ph.D., Carnegie Mellon 
University 

JEREMY NORTHUP, Assistant Professor of 
Psychology, School of Arts & Sciences; B.A, 
M.A., Psy.D., Point Park University 

ROBERT J. O’GARA, Professor Emeritus of 
Advertising and Public Relations, School of 
Communication;  B.S.,  Utica  College  of 
Syracuse  University;  M.A.,  Duquesne 
University 

DIOGO  OLIVEIRA,  Assistant  Professor  of 
Applied  Computer  Science,  Department  of 
Business Analytics and Technology, Rowland 
School of Business; B.S., Salgado de Oliveira 
University;  M.S.,  Federal  University  of 
Goias; Ph.D., University of South Florida 

JAYNE OLSHANSKI, Associate Professor of 
Accounting  Economic 
Finance, 
Information Technology, Rowland School of 
Business;  B.S.,  M.B.A.,  Pennsylvania  State 
University; CPA.  

and 

LUIS V. PALACIOS-SALGUERO, Associate 
Professor  of  Economics  and  Finance, 
Department  of  Business  Analytics  and 
Technology,  Rowland  School  of  Business; 
B.A.,  Del  Pacisico  University;  M.A.,  Ph.D., 
Rutgers University 

HANJIN  PARK,  Associate  Professor, 
Department of Film and Animation; School 
and  Animation; 
of  Theatre, 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  M.F.A., 
University of California Los Angeles; B.F.A., 
Yong-In University 

Film, 

JUNE  KYU  PARK,  Associate  Professor, 
Department of Film and Animation; School 
of  Theatre, 
and  Animation; 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.F.A., 
In  University;  M.F.A.,  Syracuse 
Yong 
University  

Film, 

PARSA,  Associate 

ARAM 
Professor, 
Department  of  Natural  Sciences  and 
Engineering,  School  of  Arts  &  Sciences; 
B.A.S.,  Theran  Azad  University;  M.A.S., 
University  of  Liverpool;  Ph.D.,  Ryerson 
University 

 
 
 
 
Professor 

of 
PASCAL, 
MATTHEW 
Mathematics  and  Chair,  Department  of 
Natural Sciences and Engineering, School of 
Arts & Sciences; B.S., Duquesne University; 
M.S.,  University  of  Pittsburgh;  Ph.D., 
American University 

KELLY PASCARELLA, Assistant Professor, 
School of Education; B.S., The Pennsylvania 
State  University;  M.Ed.,  California 
University  of  Pennsylvania;  Ed.D.,  Point 
Park University 

MATTHEW PELFREY, Associate Professor, 
Department of Film and Animation; School 
of  Theatre, 
and  Animation; 
Conservatory of Performing  Arts; B.A., San 
State  University,  M.F.A., 
Francisco 
University of California, Los Angeles 

Film, 

CHARLES A. PERKINS, Professor Emeritus 
of  Business;  B.S.,  United  States  Naval 
Academy;  M.B.A.,  University  of  California 
Berkeley;  Ph.D.,  The  George  Washington 
University 

SARAH  PERRIER,  Assistant  Provost  for 
Curriculum and Education; Director of the 
Teaching  and  Learning  Lab;  Professor  of 
English, Department of Literary Arts, School 
of  Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A.,  Ohio  University; 
M.F.A.,  George  Mason  University;  Ph.D., 
University of Cincinnati 

DANIEL  J.  REED,  Associate  Professor 
Emeritus  of  Civil  Engineering  Technology, 
Department  of  Natural  Sciences  and 
Engineering  Technology,  School  of  Arts  & 
Sciences;  B.S.C.E.,  Geneva  College;  M.S., 
University of Pittsburgh 

VINCENNE 
BELTRÁN, 
REVILLA 
Professor of Education, School of Education; 
B.A., B.A., Point Park University; M.S. Ed., 
Duquesne  University;  Ph.D.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh 

ANDREW  RICHARDS,  Senior  Lecturer, 
Department  of  Criminal 
Justice  & 
Intelligence  Studies,  School  of  Arts  & 
Sciences;  B.A.,  Alvernia  College;  M.A., 
Indiana University of Pennsylvania 

JUAN  RIVERA  LEBRON,  Assistant 
Professor and Chair of Theatre, Department 
of  Theatre;  School  of  Theatre,  Film,  and 

Animation;  B.F.A.,  Carnegie  Mellon 
University; M.F.A., M.S., University of Idaho 

BRENT ROBBINS, Professor of Psychology, 
Department of Psychology, School of Arts & 
Sciences;  B.A.,  Webster  University;  M.A., 
Ph.D., Duquesne University 

CHRISTOPHER ROLINSON, Professor of 
of 
Photojournalism, 
Communication;  B.A.,  Slippery  Rock 
University;  M.A.,  Point  Park  University; 
M.F.A., Chatham University 

School 

ROBERT ROSS, Professor  of  Social Justice 
Studies 
and  Community  Engagement, 
Department  of  Literature,  Culture,  and 
Society,  School  of  Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A., 
West  Chester  University  of  Pennsylvania; 
M.Sc.,  University  College  London;  Ph.D., 
Syracuse University 

COLIN  RUFFER,  Assistant  Professor, 
Department  of  Theatre;  School  of  Theatre, 
Film,  and  Animation,  Conservatory  of 
Performing  Arts;  B.M.E.,  Winthrop 
University;  M.M.,  Boston  Conservatory  of 
Music; M.F.A., Penn State University  

JENNIFER  SCHEIER,  Assistant  Professor, 
Department  of  Theatre;  School  of  Theatre, 
Film,  and  Animation;  Conservatory  of 
Performing  Arts; B.A., Eastern Connecticut 
State University; M.F.A., University of Iowa; 
Ph.D., University of Illinois 

BEN SCHONBERGER, Assistant Professor, 
School 
B.F.A., 
of  Communication; 
Shepherd  University;  M.F.A.,  Cranbrook 
Academy of Art 

SARAH  SCHULZ,  Professor  of  Behavioral 
Sciences,  Chair,  Department  of  Psychology, 
School  of  Arts  &  Sciences;  B.A.S.W., 
University of Pittsburgh; M.S.W., University 
of Michigan; Ph.D., University of California 
– Berkeley, LSW 

JEFFREY  SEAMAN,  Associate  Professor, 
Applied Computer Analytics & Technology; 
Rowland School of Business; B.S. University 
of Phoenix; M.I.S., Robert Morris University 

CHRISTINE  SECILIA,  Senior  Lecturer, 
Criminal Justice, School of Arts & Sciences; 
B.S., M.S., Ed.D., Point Park University 

399 

 
Department 

JOHN  SHEPARD,  Professor  Emeritus  of 
Theatre, 
Theatre, 
Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts;  B.A., 
University  of  California  -  Irvine;  M.F.A., 
California State University - Long Beach 

of 

ROBERT  SKERTICH,  Professor  of  Public 
Administration,  Rowland 
of 
Business;  B.S.Ed.    Indiana  University  of 
Pennsylvania;  MPPM.,  Ph.D.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh 

School 

MARC SPAULDING, Assistant Professor of 
Modern  Dance,  Department  of  Concert 
Dance, School of Dance, Conservatory of the 
Performing  Arts;  B.F.A.,  University  of  the 
Arts; M.F.A., University of California Irvine 

BECKY SPRITZ, Dean, School of Arts and 
Sciences; 
The 
Pennsylvania State University 

B.S.,  M.S., 

Ph.D., 

R.  HAGEN  STARZ,  Assistant  Professor  of 
Entrepreneurship 
and  Business  Law, 
Department  of  Management,  Rowland 
School of Business; B.A., Allegheny College; 
J.D., University of Pittsburgh School of Law  

SUSAN STOWE, Professor of Dance, Chair 
of Department of Concert Dance, School of 
Dance,  Conservatory  of  Performing  Arts; 
B.F.A., Point Park University 

EDWARD  STRIMLAN,  Professor  and 
Chair,  Department  of  Criminal  Justice  and 
Intelligence  Studies,  School  of  Arts  and 
Sciences;  B.S.,  University  of  Pittsburgh; 
M.D., American University of the Caribbean  

STEPHEN  TANZILLI,  Associate  Professor 
and Dean, Rowland School of Business; B.S., 
Duquesne  University;  J.D.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh 

ED TRAVERSARI, Professor of Sports, Arts, 
Entertainment, 
and  Music  Business; 
Rowland  School  of  Business;  B.S.,  B.A., 
Robert Morris University; M.B.A. Point Park 
University 

JONATHAN  TRUEBLOOD,  Associate 
and 
Professor,  Department  of  Film 
Animation;  School  of  Theatre,  Film,  and 
Animation;  Conservatory  of  Performing 
Arts;  B.A.,  Edinboro  University 
of 
Pennsylvania;  M.F.A.,  Carnegie  Mellon 

400 

University 

MARK  VOORTMAN,  Associate  Professor 
of Information Technology, Rowland School 
of  Business;  B.S.,  M.S.,  Delft  University  of 
Technology; Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh 

ANDREA J. WACHTER, Professor Emeriti 
of Information Technology, Rowland School 
of  Business;  B.A.,  Flora  Stone  Mather 
College,  Case  Western  Reserve  University; 
B.S.,  Point  Park  University;  M.A.T., 
Duquesne  University;  M.P.M.,  Carnegie 
Mellon University; MT(ASCP) 

EDWARD  C.  WACHTER,  JR.,  Professor 
Emeritus of Business Management, Rowland 
School  of  Business;  B.A.,  Duquesne 
University;  J.D.,  Case  Western  Reserve 
University 

TAHIRAH  WALKER,  Assistant  Professor 
and  Chair,  Department  of  Community 
Engagement  and  Leadership,  Rowland 
School  of  Business,  B.A.,  Sarah  Lawrence 
College;  M.S.,  Carnegie  Mellon  University; 
Ph.D., Duquesne University 

ROBIN  WALSH,  Professor  of  Theatre; 
Department  of  Theatre;  School  of  Theatre, 
Film,  and  Animation;  Conservatory  of 
Performing  Arts;  B.F.A.,  Point  Park 
University; M.F.A., West Virginia University 

PORTIA K. WESTON,  Professor Emerita of 
English, Department of Literary Arts, School 
of  Arts  &  Sciences;  A.A.,  Gadsden  State 
Junior College; B.S., M.S., Jacksonville State 
University; Ed.D., Clemson University 

ARLEEN  WHEAT,  Professor  of  Special 
Education,  School  of  Education,  B.A., 
Indiana  University  of  Pennsylvania,  M.A., 
University  of  Pittsburgh,  Ph.D.,  Duquesne 
University 

CATHERINE  WILSON, 
Associate 
Professor, Department of Theatre; School of 
Theatre, Film, and Animation; Conservatory 
of Performing Arts; B.F.A., Tufts University; 
M.F.A., Carnegie Mellon University 

PHILIP  WINTERS,  Professor  of  Theatre, 
Department  of  Theatre;  School  of  Theatre, 
Film,  and  Animation;  Conservatory  of 
Performing  Arts;  B.A.,  University  of 

 
Pittsburgh; M.F.A., Point Park University 

MARK  WINTZ,  Associate  Professor, 
Department  of  Criminal 
and 
Intelligence  Studies,  School  of  Arts  & 
Sciences; B.A., Kent State University; M.A., 
University  of  Akron;  Ph.D.,  University  of 
Pittsburgh  

Justice 

KAMRYN  YORK,  Assistant  Professor  and 
Chair, School of Education; B.S. Penn State 
University; M.Ed. George Mason University; 
Ed.D., Point Park University 

401 

 
 
 
 
 
